
--- Page 1 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Richard Cornelius Suwandi
CUHK-Shenzhen
Feng Yin
CUHK-Shenzhen
Kevin Murphy
University of British Columbia
/githubCode/gl⌢beWebsite
Abstract
Kernels encode the inductive bias of a wide range of machine learning models, yet
automated kernel design faces a fundamental dilemma. A fixed grammar of base kernels
and operators guarantees validity but limits the search to structures expressible by those
building blocks. Conversely, unrestricted programs remove this limitation but no longer
guarantee validity. In our stress tests, 22–58% of LLM-generated kernels that pass
numerical checks on random inputs fail when evaluated at different scales or dimensions.
We propose Kernel Autoresearch (KERNAUT), which treats kernel design as open-
ended model discovery. Coding agents write kernels as programs, while construction
contracts ensure that every accepted kernel is valid. A quality-diversity archive retains
high-performing kernels with distinct behaviors, and novelty screening steers agents
toward functionally new candidates. Our experiments demonstrate that the discovered
kernels encode reusable inductive biases that generalize to unseen tasks. On held-out
black-box optimization families, a discovered kernel outperforms a meta-learned deep
kernel trained on the same episodes. Furthermore, kernels discovered from ten enzyme-
kinetic rate laws achieve lower error than tuned ARD and deep kernel baselines on five
unseen mechanisms. The discovered kernels are also interpretable programs that human
researchers can refine: a human-refined version of one further reduces the held-out
predictive error by 5.7% and optimization regret by 7.8%.
Keywordskernel learning, program synthesis, coding agents, autoresearch, quality-diversity search
1 Introduction
Kernel choice largely determines the inductive bias of a wide range of machine learning methods, yet
most automated kernel design still searches over a narrow space. Most approaches start from base kernels
and combine them through a fixed set of operators, whether via greedy selection (Duvenaud et al., 2013),
Bayesian optimization (BO; Malkomes et al., 2016), neural composition (Sun et al., 2018), or search
guided by large language models (LLMs; Suwandi et al., 2025b). Despite their different search strategies,
these approaches share the same tradeoff. Restricting search to a predefined grammar guarantees validity
by construction, but limits search to structures expressible through the base kernels and operators. We
instead formulate kernel design as open-ended program synthesis, allowing agents to propose kernels
beyond this grammar. However, this broader search space introduces a verification challenge because an
arbitrary program does not necessarily define a mathematically valid kernel.
An unrestricted program need not define a symmetric, positive semidefinite (PSD) kernel (Rice, 1953),
and numerical checks on sampled inputs cannot establish these properties over the entire input domain.
We therefore propose Kernel Autoresearch (KERNAUT), in which coding agents write kernel components
and a trusted interpreter constructs valid kernels. The interpreter uses PSD-preserving rules that we call
construction contracts. The system evaluates the resulting kernels and stores high-performing programs
with distinct kernel behavior in a quality-diversity archive. This archive guides later proposals and preserves
diverse discoveries for evaluation. Our contributions are as follows.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2610.10394v1  [cs.LG]  7 Oct 2026

--- Page 2 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
• Open-ended kernel discovery with PSD-preserving contracts.Agents propose executable feature
maps, spectral representations, input transformations, and kernel compositions beyond a fixed gram-
mar. A trusted interpreter constructs each accepted Gram matrix through one of the PSD-preserving
construction contracts (§3.1–3.2).
• Verified execution with a quality-diversity archive.A deterministic backend executes, verifies, tunes,
and scores every proposal. The archive retains programs that combine strong predictive performance
with distinct kernel behavior. The system then uses accepted examples and structured rejection reasons
to guide subsequent proposals (§3.3–3.4).
• Reusable inductive biases across unseen tasks.We freeze each discovered program before evaluation
and reuse it without structural modification. We evaluate prediction on held-out black-box optimization
(BBO) functions, time series, enzyme mechanisms, and glucose patients (§4).
• Interpretable discoveries across domains.Because the kernel programs are short, we can analyze
the structures they encode, such as warps and folds for BBO functions, trend and period banks for time
series, rate-law shapes for enzymes, and meal and insulin responses for glucose (Appendix F.2). As
a case study, we analyze the dual warp–fold (DWF) kernel and a human-refined variant with lower
held-out predictive error (§4.3.1).
2 Related Work
Deep, spectral, and compositional kernel learning.Deep kernel learning jointly trains a Gaussian
process (GP) with a learned feature map (Wilson et al., 2016). Wistuba and Grabocka (2021) meta-learn
this deep-kernel model across related BO tasks. Spectral mixture methods learn a stationary spectral density
(Wilson and Adams, 2013). Other methods combine base kernels through PSD-preserving operators by
using greedy search (Duvenaud et al., 2013; Lloyd et al., 2014), BO (Malkomes et al., 2016), differentiable
composition (Sun et al., 2018), or LLM-guided evolution (Suwandi et al., 2025b). These methods preserve
kernel validity by restricting search to a chosen deep-kernel architecture, spectral family, or compositional
grammar.
LLM-generated kernels with empirical checks.The closest prior work, Yun et al. (2026), uses LLM-
driven evolutionary search to generate kernels beyond standard compositions. Their method screens each
candidate by attempting a Cholesky factorization on sampled inputs. Passing this check provides evidence
only for the sampled Gram matrix, but it does not establish kernel validity over the entire input domain.
In our numerical screening experiment, 22–58% of unrestricted programs passed the initial checks but
failed additional checks at different input scales and dimensions (Appendix A.6). In contrast, KERNAUT
constructs each accepted kernel through a PSD-preserving contract. Kernel validity therefore follows from
the construction under the contract’s stated assumptions (Proposition 1).
Coding agents and autoresearch.Coding-agent systems often follow a propose–evaluate–revise loop,
as in FunSearch and AlphaEvolve for algorithms and mathematical constructions (Romera-Paredes et al.,
2024; Novikov et al., 2025) and in autoresearch for training code (Karpathy, 2026). Model Discovery
Agent (Murphy, 2026) and Agentic BO (Brunzema et al., 2026) similarly separate agent proposals from
numerical evaluation in scientific and optimization workflows. KERNAUTapplies this approach to kernel
discovery, and the backend verifies each program’s construction before the archive accepts it.
3 Kernel Autoresearch Framework
3.1 Kernels as Programs
Let X be the input space and Θ a parameter space. We represent a kernel by an executable program
κ:X × X ×Θ→R and write κθ(x, y) =κ(x, y, θ) for fixed parameters. Agents write the components
of these programs in Python, and the backend runs them in a sandbox with time and memory limits. The
question is which programs define valid kernels.
Definition 1(Validity).A program κ is valid if, for every θ∈Θ , κθ is symmetric and every Gram matrix
Kwith entriesK ij =κ θ(xi, xj)on finitely many inputsx 1, . . . , xn ∈ Xis positive semidefinite (PSD),
c⊤Kc=
X
i,j
cicj κθ(xi, xj)≥0for allc∈R n.(1)
2

--- Page 3 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
TASK CONTEXT
domain description
archive and diagnostics
Coding Agent
LLM-guided kernel search
propose revise interpret
structured feedback loop
Verification & Archive
deterministic backend
ACCEPTANCE CHECKS
T0 Runs with expected output shape
T1 Passes PSD tests on sampled inputs
T2 Valid construction + consistency checks
MAP-ELITES ARCHIVE T2 required
niche
novelty band
Each cell keeps the best
candidate for each distinct
behavior
CERTIFICATE CONTRACTS
FEATURE MAP
⟨φ(x),φ(y)⟩
Inner product
SPECTRAL
µ≥0
Bochner
INPUT TRANSFORM
k0(Tx,Ty)
PSD pullback
CLOSURE
B,+,×
PSD closure
Model Fitting & Inference
posterior computation, parameter tuning
task context
program
feedback
check
execute
diagnostics
Figure 1:The KERNAUTframework.The coding agent (blue) writes kernel components under one of
four construction contracts. The deterministic backend (orange) applies three acceptance tiers, T0 to T2,
and only T2 programs enter the quality-diversity archive, where each cell keeps the best candidate for one
behavior. Archived kernels and structured feedback guide later proposals. The grey module computes the
posterior and tunes parameters.
For an arbitrary program, validity cannot be guaranteed in general (Rice, 1953), and numerical tests
on sampled inputs cannot cover the entire domain. We therefore ask the agent to only write a kernel
component. A trusted interpreter then assembles the kernel using a PSD-preserving rule. We call such
component interfaces, together with their assembly rules, construction contracts.
Definition 2(Construction contracts).For fixed θ, the agent writes one of the following four component
types. Each proposed component can expose free parameters in θ, but trusted backend code optimizes
those parameters. The interpreter then assemblesκ θ from that component.
•Feature map: a functionφ θ :X →R m, givingκ θ(x, y) =φ θ(x)⊤φθ(y).
• Spectral: frequencies ω1, . . . , ωM ∈R d and raw weights r1, . . . , rM ∈R , determined only by the input
dimension d and kernel parameters θ, giving κθ(x, y) =PM
j=1 wj cos

ω⊤
j (x−y)

with wj =r 2
j /M≥
0.
• Pullback: an input transform Tθ :X →R m, giving κθ(x, y) =k 0

Tθ(x), Tθ(y)

. Here, k0 is alibrary
kernel, which is a trusted implementation that the agent can reference but cannot change. Examples
include radial basis function (RBF), Matérn, and rational-quadratic kernels.
• Closure: a tree whose leaves are library kernels or kernels already accepted under the first three contracts,
combined by sums, products, and nonnegative scalar multiplication.
The contracts above describe familiar ways to construct a covariance. Feature and spectral programs
become explicit inner products, pullbacks apply a valid kernel after changing the input geometry, and
closure programs use operations that preserve PSD. The trusted interpreter performs this assembly, rather
than accepting a covariance matrix written directly by the agent. Appendix A.1 gives the algebra for every
case.
Proposition 1(PSD preservation by construction).For fixed θ, every contract produces a symmetric PSD
matrix if its component returns finite outputs with the dimensions its interface requires. If the component is
also pure on a domain X0, meaning that its output depends only on the input and parameters and not on
other batch inputs, random draws, or previous calls, the assembled function is a valid kernel on X0. If this
holds for everyθ∈Θ, the program is valid.
Purity is needed because a batch-dependent component can return PSD matrices on each call without
defining one kernel function. The contracts remain expressive, since finite polynomial feature maps
uniformly approximate any continuous PSD kernel on a compact set (Appendix A.2).
3.2 Acceptance Checks
The backend checks finiteness, the output dimensions required by each interface, and purity, which trusted
assembly cannot enforce. Deterministic source inspection rejects constructs that can introduce batch
3

--- Page 4 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Algorithm 1Overview of KERNAUTcampaign.
1: Input:run budget B, new-root probability pnew, number of inspirations kinsp, meta-training tasks
Dtr, meta-validation tasksD val, sealed test tasksD test
2:Initialize an empty archiveA ← ∅of accepted programs
3:forj= 1, . . . , Bdo
4:Choose a target nicheniche ⋆, filling empty niches first
5: With probability pnew set parent←∅ to write a new root. Otherwise set parent to an elite drawn
from the archive to revise
6:Sample up tok insp elites as inspirationsI, from other niches when revising
7:Run one agent session (Algorithm 2) to get a programκ, its search scores, and its cellc
8:ifκ̸=∅then
9:AddκtoA, and make it the elite of cellcifcis empty orsbeats the current elite
10:end if
11:end for
12:Selectκ ⋆ from all ofAby the validation score onD val (Algorithm 3)
13:returnκ ⋆ and its score onD test
dependence, randomness, or persistent state. Behavioral tests check determinism and consistency under
batch permutation, subsetting, extension by new points, and point duplication (Table 3).
Checks proceed in three increasingly expensive tiers (Table 2). Tier 0 checks execution and output
dimensions. Tier 1 adds numerical PSD tests on sampled inputs. Tier 2 adds contract assembly and
consistency checks. Only Tier 2 programs can enter the archive. Appendix A.6 shows why sampled PSD
tests alone are insufficient.
3.3 Discovery Campaign
Campaigns, runs, and the archive.Acampaignis one complete search on one domain. Campaigns
have separate archives and can run independently in parallel. Within each campaign, a fixed budget of
B runsexecutes sequentially. A run is one fresh coding-agent session that aims to submit one program.
Within a run, aroundis one agent turn of proposing, calling a tool, or revising after feedback. Runs share
information only through a persistentarchive, the collection of every accepted program in the campaign.
Each column in Figure 2a is one campaign, and its markers show accepted programs from its runs. A run
either writes a program from scratch, called aroot, or revises one archived program, called itsparent. A
revision counts only if its source code differs from the parent’s, so changing tuned constants alone does not
create a descendant.
Niches, cells, and elites.We use a multi-dimensional archive of phenotypic elites grid (MAP-Elites;
Mouret and Clune, 2015). Anicheis a broad label for what a program tries to express (e.g., input geometry,
spectral structure, feature projection, additive interaction, local structure). Each accepted program occupies
onecell, set by its niche, its feature growth with input dimension, and its novelty band (§3.4). The best
program in a cell is itselite, and a newcomer replaces it only by entering the same cell with a higher score.
An elite is a local representative of one behavior. It is not necessarily the best program overall or the one
chosen for testing. Figure 6 shows how the archive fills across successive runs.
One discovery run.The scheduler assigns each run atarget niche, prioritizing empty niches. With
probability pnew, the agent writes a new root. Otherwise, it revises a parent elite. The prompt includes up
to kinsp archived elites asinspirations, drawn from other niches when revising a parent. The backend tunes
the program’s declared parameters on meta-training episodes usingNtune Halton settings (Halton, 1960)
and scores the best setting. Appendix A.3 gives the values ofB,p new,k insp, andN tune.
We test anensembleproposer 1, which selects one LLM per run through a Thompson-sampling bandit
(Appendix B.1), and afrontierproposer, which uses GPT-6 Astra throughout. After all runs, validation
selects one frozen program from the archive. Algorithm 1 summarizes the campaign. Algorithms 2 and 3
in Appendix A.3 detail the agent session and final selection.
1The ensemble contains GLM-5.2, DeepSeek-V4-Pro, and Qwen-3.8 Max.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
3.4 Novelty Screening
An agent may simply rediscover a known kernel under a new name, notation, or implementation. Such
programs could occupy the archive without adding distinct kernel behavior. We therefore compare both
the proposed formulation and the resulting behavior. Before submitting code, each run registers its
mathematical form, PSD argument, closest known kernel, and expected behavior (Table 4). To compare
behavior, we define thekernel fingerprint ¯Kκ(Xd) as the centered, unit-norm Gram matrix on nprobe fixed
points Xd ⊂[0,1] d for each probe dimension d∈ D in Equation (10). We measure novelty by the smallest
average fingerprint distance to a reference kernel:
dnov(κ,R) = min
r∈R
1
|D|
X
d∈D


 ¯Kκ(Xd)− ¯Kr(Xd)


F ,(2)
where R contains standard, multiscale, and previously discovered kernels. We define τnov as the threshold
for identifying near-duplicate programs. The threshold is soft rather than a hard rejection, so a program
with dnov < τ nov can still enter the archive if it passes the acceptance checks and later be reused as
an inspiration. The penalty decreases from a maximum of λnov as prediction improves, as defined in
Equation (7). Appendix A.3 reports the values ofτ nov andλ nov used in our experiments.
4 Experiments
We evaluate discovered kernels as GP covariance functions and ask three questions: (1) Do the discovered
kernels transfer to tasks the search never saw? (2) Does writing new base kernels matter, or would
recombining known ones do as well? (3) Do the discovered kernels encode meaningful domain structures?
4.1 Meta-Evaluation Framework
We seek kernel programs that transfer to unseen tasks without repeating discovery. Following Goldie et al.
(2026), we search for programs and tune their parameters on meta-training episodes. We select a frozen
program on new meta-validation episodes from the same families, then test transfer to families or domain
structures withheld from search. Search never uses validation episodes, so choosing among the frozen
programs is a finite model-selection problem. Under the assumptions in Appendix A.5, the selection bound
depends on the number of frozen candidates, not the size of the program space.
4.2 Baselines and Metrics
We compare our method against the following baselines.
• Fixed kernels:linear, periodic, RBF, Matérn, rational quadratic, and automatic relevance determination
(ARD) Matérn.
• Learned kernel families:spectral mixtures (Wilson and Adams, 2013), grid spectral mixtures (GSM;
Suwandi et al., 2025a), input warping (Snoek et al., 2014), and random Fourier features (RFF; Rahimi
and Recht, 2007).
• Deep and meta-learned kernels:deep kernel learning (DKL; Wilson et al., 2016) on ChemBench,
and Few-Shot Bayesian Optimization (FSBO; Wistuba and Grabocka, 2021), which meta-learns a deep
kernel across BBO functions.
• Kernel structure search:compositional kernel search (CKS; Duvenaud et al., 2013; Lloyd et al., 2014),
CAKE (Suwandi et al., 2025b), and AutoGP (Saad et al., 2023) on forecasting.
• Domain references:a domain-feature library on ChemBench, and relative-time ARD Matérn, a
physiological library, and per-patient marginal-likelihood fits on GlucoseBench.
Each family keeps its best setting on meta-training episodes (Appendix B.1). Appendices B.3, D.3, E.1,
and E.2 give the detailed protocols for the baselines.
Predictive metrics.Each episode is a small regression dataset. Every kernel runs inside the same GP
with its discovered structure fixed. The backend fits only covariance amplitude and observation noise by
training marginal likelihood on fixed grids in Equation (13). We report the continuous ranked probability
score (CRPS; Gneiting and Raftery, 2007) in Equation (11). This score evaluates the predictive distribution
5

--- Page 6 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 E6 E7 F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6 F7
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
Validation CRPS
Ensemble proposer Frontier proposer
(a) All 14 BBO campaigns (b) Lineage of the E1 selection
0.540
DWF
0.647
spectral
fold
0.553
spectral
warp
0.633
spectral
interac-
tion
0.600
local
bump
0.598
dual
interac-
tion
0.615
phase
spread
0.622
index
bump
0.584
index bump
(rev.)
0.581
multiscale
bump
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.60
0.62
0.64
Validation CRPS
Ensemble proposer Frontier proposer Selected by validation Best tuned baseline
Figure 2:Synthetic regression: search archives.(a) Validation continuous ranked probability score
(CRPS, Equation (11), lower is better) of every accepted program in 14 campaigns. E1–E7 use the
three-model ensemble, and F1–F7 use GPT-6 Astra as the sole proposer. Stars mark validation-selected
programs, and the dashed line marks the best tuned baseline. (b) Lineage of the first ensemble campaign
(E1). Edges join each parent to its revisions, and the starred node is the selected program.
against each held-out observation. Lower CRPS is better (Appendix A.4). Appendix B.1 also evaluates the
frozen kernels in GP-based Bayesian optimization on the synthetic functions of §4.3.1.
4.3 Results
4.3.1 Black-Box Optimization
Benchmark.Tasks are standard test functions rescaled to [0,1] d. Each episode fits on n= 8 + 2d
randomly sampled observations and scores 32 distinct held-out query points. Search and validation draw
on five function families (Branin, Ackley, Cosine, Hartmann-6, Levy), and testing uses six other families
that the search never sees (Bukin, Drop-Wave, Griewank, Hölder Table, Rosenbrock, Rastrigin). Each
episode randomly permutes, reflects, and warps the coordinates and may append irrelevant ones. Every
campaign consists of twelve discovery runs on meta-training episodes (Appendix B.1), and Figure 2 shows
how the accepted programs relate. Each program and baseline is then evaluated on 50 validation and 60
test tasks.
Results.We repeated discovery seven times with an ensemble of three LLM proposers. We froze
each validation-selected kernel before testing. Most campaigns outperformed the best tuned baseline on
validation (Figure 2a). On held-out families, six of seven kernels achieved lower predictive CRPS than
Matérn-5/2, the strongest fixed baseline. The average CRPS improvement was 3%, and each campaign
selected a different program (Appendix B.4). We also ran seven matched campaigns with GPT-6 Astra
as the only proposer. Their CRPS gains over Matérn ranged from 5.8% to 11.2%, with a mean of 8.3%
and a standard deviation of 2.0% (p= 0.003 against the ensemble). Within the fixed twelve-run budget,
Astra reached the best tuned baseline after one run, whereas the ensemble required about eight (Figure 10).
Across campaigns, Astra’s average discovery matched the human-refined DWF kernel without human
editing (Appendix B.6).
Open versus closed search.We tested whether the improvement came from the search procedure or
from access to kernels outside the fixed grammar. The matched ablation used the same agent, budget, score,
and search loop, but restricted proposals to compositions of library kernels. The full four-contract search
6

--- Page 7 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85
Dual warp–fold
Mat´ ern-5/2 (ℓ = 0 .5)
Periodic ( ℓ = 1, p = 2)
CAKE (best of 50)
Simple spectral warp
RQ ( ℓ = 0 .25, α = 1)
ARD Mat´ ern-3/2
ARD Mat´ ern-5/2
Input warping
Random Fourier features
RBF ( ℓ = 0 .25)
Warp multiscale bump
Spectral mixture
Grid spectral mixture
Linear
0.601
0.612
0.618
0.609
0.618
0.618
0.624
0.626
0.633
0.646
0.641
0.636
0.709
0.736
0.791
Test CRPS ↓
0.7 0.8 0.9
0.671
0.693
0.678
0.708
0.694
0.706
0.713
0.752
0.726
0.718
0.756
0.803
0.784
0.895
0.872
Test regret AUC ↓
Baseline Discovered 95% interval of gap to DWF
Figure 3: Frozen BBO results on 60 held-out test tasks (lower is better). Left: CRPS. Right: regret AUC,
the mean normalized simple regret over BO steps. Points are means. Bars are paired 95% bootstrap
intervals for the gap to DWF, where each line ends. Rows are ordered by average rank across both metrics.
Fixed kernels use the setting selected on training tasks. Grid spectral mixtures (GSM), input warping, and
random Fourier features (RFF) average five fitted variants.
won 11 of 12 paired campaigns and reduced test CRPS by about 8% relative to this closure-only ablation
(Table 7). CKS and CAKE performed similarly to closure-only search. Independent proposals also gave
higher CRPS, but this arm changes feedback, cross-iteration novelty screening, and candidate retention
together. The comparison therefore tests their combined contribution rather than archive sharing alone
(Appendices B.4 and B.5).
A representative discovery.We analyzedual warp–fold(DWF), which validation selected in the first
ensemble campaign (E1). DWF is a nonstationary kernel that is not a sum or product of standard kernels.
It applies a mild monotonewarpand a triangularfoldto each coordinate, so values at mirrored points
are encouraged to agree (Figure 14, Proposition 4). DWF outperformed every fixed baseline in predictive
CRPS, and the paired intervals excluded zero. Keeping only thewarp, or only thefold, did not reproduce
that gain (Appendix C.8). A human-refined variant then reduced held-out CRPS by a further 5.7%
(Appendix C). Given the same meta-training data, DWF also reached a lower predictive CRPS than FSBO
(Wistuba and Grabocka, 2021) (Appendix B.3).
4.3.2 Time-Series Forecasting
Benchmark.We test whether one frozen kernel transfers across time series without adapting its structure
to each record. Search and validation use new windows from one monthly NOAA Global Monitoring
Laboratory record2 for each of CO2, CH4, and N2O. Testing uses SF6, CFC-12, and CFC-11. Each episode
samples a training-window length between 216 and Trec −48 months, then holds out the next 48 months.
Here, Trec is the record length. Appendix D.1 lists each record length and the window-sampling rule. Each
record has its own univariate GP, and only the frozen kernel is shared. The CFC records rise and then
decline, a shape that none of the three meta-training records has, so they test extrapolation. Some windows
reverse time, so extrapolation runs in both directions (Appendices D.1 and D.3).
Results.Validation selected a novel residual period-bank kernel, which adds a constant feature and a
bank of low-frequency sinusoidal features to a Matérn kernel, as defined in Equation(26). It had the lowest
mean validation CRPS across CO2, CH4, and N2O, and it matched AutoGP (Saad et al., 2023), which
infers a new structure for every window (Appendix D.3). Figure 4 shows where the gain comes from. On
CFC-12 and CFC-11, the trajectory turns within the held-out interval. RBF extrapolates the training trend
with a narrow band, while the period-bank kernel flattens toward the plateau and its wider band covers the
observations. It ranked first among 58 frozen candidates on both records (Appendix D.3). Its sinusoids act
2The records are taken from https://gml.noaa.gov/.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
2014 2016 2018 2020 2022
Year
8
9
10
11Concentration (ppt)
SF6 forecast
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
Year
535.0
537.5
540.0
542.5
545.0
547.5
550.0
CFC-12 backcast
1998 2000 2002 2004 2006
Year
245
250
255
260
265
CFC-11 backcast
Discovered (period-bank) RBF Observed preﬁx Held out
Figure 4:Forecasting: held-out greenhouse-gas records.The discovered kernel is the ensemble-selected
residual period-bank kernel. Each panel shows, for one record, the window with its median CRPS. Values
are in parts per trillion (ppt). SF6 is forecast forward. The chlorofluorocarbon records CFC-12 and CFC-11
are backcast, so their held-out stretch precedes the dotted line. Bands are 95% intervals. RBF misses the
turn in both CFC records. Its smooth posterior mean follows the broader trend of the training window and
starts above the last observation.
as slow trends and not as cycles (Appendix F.2). Validation selection mattered because the discovery that
scored best on SF6 in hindsight lost every CFC window to the validation-selected kernel.
4.3.3 Enzyme Kinetics
Benchmark.ChemBench (Kabra et al., 2026) poses enzyme kinetics as regression from seven experi-
mental variables to a reaction rate r0. The variables are substrate concentration, inhibitor concentration,
second-substrate concentration, product concentration, enzyme loading, temperature, and pH. Each episode
contains one dataset from one mechanism, with 20 random experiments for fitting and 20 for scoring.
Search uses data from ten canonical, single-mechanism rate-law families. Testing uses five structurally
distinct mechanisms outside those families, with 15 episodes per mechanism. Appendix E.1 names both
sets and specifies the split.
Results.Validation error predicted which campaigns transferred to held-out mechanisms. Five of the nine
ensemble campaigns had lower validation error than the other four. All five reduced error on every held-out
mechanism (Figure 5a). The kernel selected by validation achieved about 25% lower error than Matérn. It
performed similarly to the optimized ARD, deep-kernel, and domain-library references (Appendix E.1).
GPT-6 Astra produced larger gains. The selected kernel reduced error on every held-out mechanism.
Relative to optimized ARD, it reduced error by almost half. It also outperformed all six learned references
in paired tests (Table 16). The selected program constructs ten substrate-response shapes from the training
rate laws. It also includes local sensitivities to substrate concentration and modulation by enzyme loading.
The kernel predicts an unseen mechanism as a combination of these known shapes and local variations. A
distance-based kernel cannot express this biochemical prior (Appendices F.2 and E.1).
4.3.4 Glucose Dynamics
Benchmark.GlucoseBench (Murphy, 2026) builds on the UV A/Padova type-1 diabetes simulator (Xie,
2018; Kovatchev et al., 2009). In each episode, a virtual patient eats a meal and may receive an insulin
bolus. We forecast continuous glucose monitor (CGM) readings after a 45-minute prefix. We use 10 child
profiles for search, 10 adolescents for selection, and 10 adults for testing. Each forecast uses only episodes
from its target patient. Thus, the experiment tests whether the kernel structure transfers across patients. We
measure error using the normalized MSE of the CGM readings, aggregated by the GlucoseBench evaluator.
Appendix E.2 defines normalized MSE in Equation (25) and its aggregation, and also reports CRPS.
Results.Figure 5b shows that error decreases as patient-specific data increases. The benefit of each
discovered kernel is largest in the low-sample regime. The strongest tuned reference is a relative-time
8

--- Page 9 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 E6 E7 E8 E9 F1 F2 F3
Ordered bi-bi
Reversible MM
Allosteric activation
Fractal kinetics
Metal activation
17 3 16 10 11 -3 -2 -1 -12 22 38 10
32 14 17 12 24 6 5 6 -17 43 80 24
27 24 18 33 21 -2 -1 2 -8 46 87 18
33 10 19 26 19 0 0 2 -8 44 70 17
13 1 14 6 10 0 0 1 -10 18 27 4
Ensemble GPT-6 Astra
0.62 0.65 0.67 0.63 0.65 0.74 0.74 0.73 0.79 0.49 0.30 0.65
Validation CRPS
All mechanisms 23 10 16 17 16 0 0 2 -11 33 57 13
2 3 4 6
Training episodes per patient
0.4
0.6
1
2
Adult CGM nMSE
Discovered kernel (Astra)
Discovered kernel (ensemble)
Relative-time ARD-Mat´ ern
Per-patient ML-II
Best ﬁxed kernel (RQ)
(a) Enzyme kinetics: CRPS reduction vs. Mat´ ern-5/2 (%) (b) Glucose: error vs. data per patient
Figure 5:Enzyme kinetics and glucose dynamics: transfer to unseen mechanisms and patients.
(a) CRPS reduction (%) relative to Matérn-5/2 on held-out enzyme mechanisms, with each campaign’s
validation CRPS below. Purple means lower error and brown means higher error. Validation selected E1
and F2, shown in bold. (b) Normalized mean squared error (MSE, Equation (25) of Appendix E.2, log
scale) for adult continuous glucose monitor (CGM) forecasts after a 45-minute prefix, against training
episodes per patient. Validation selected the discovered kernels. References are tuned ARD-Matérn,
per-patient type-II maximum-likelihood (ML-II) fitting, and the best fixed kernel.
ARD Matérn kernel. It applies one learned lengthscale to each of time, time since the meal, time since
the bolus, meal size, and bolus size. Against this reference, the five discoveries reduce geometric-mean
normalized MSE by 38–67% with two training episodes. With six episodes and a 45-minute prefix, the
reductions are 0–23%, and frontier F1, frontier F2, and ensemble c2 reduce it by 15–23%. The ensemble
kernel selected by validation encodes a delayed meal response and an insulin effect that lasts about two
hours. Removing either feature eliminates the gain, which links the improvement to these physiological
response patterns (Figure 25).
4.3.5 Takeaways
The results answered the three questions of §4. Discovered kernels showed predictive transfer to unseen
BBO function families, enzyme mechanisms, glucose patients, and CFC records. On BBO benchmarks,
open search reduced test CRPS by about 8% relative to closure-only search, so access to new base kernels
mattered. These interpretable programs can also provide useful starting points for human refinement. For
example, replacing DWF’s joint construction with a sum of its warp and fold kernels further reduced
held-out CRPS by 5.7% (Appendix C).
Cost.A campaign used about 100 LLM calls and roughly 30 minutes of wall-clock time, and each
verification took about 3 seconds (Appendix D.1). This cost is paid once, because the frozen kernel is
reused on every new task with no further LLM calls.
5 Conclusion
We introduced KERNAUT, in which coding agents write kernel components and a trusted interpreter
assembles each accepted kernel under a PSD-preserving construction contract. These contracts widen
the search beyond compositions of a fixed kernel library, and every accepted program remains valid. Our
experiments demonstrated that the discovered kernels encode inductive biases that transfer to unseen tasks
without further LLM calls. Because the discovered kernels are short programs, human researchers can also
interpret and refine their structures, as shown in our DWF case study (§4.3.1). Future construction contracts
could support state-space kernels from linear ODEs (Loper et al., 2021), multi-output kernels (Álvarez
et al., 2012), kernels for structured inputs (Gärtner, 2003), and semantic kernels for LLM uncertainty
(Nikitin et al., 2024). Appendix G describes several limitations and directions for future work.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
References
Álvarez, M., Luengo, D., and Lawrence, N. D. (2009). Latent force models. InProceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 5 ofProceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 9–16.
Álvarez, M. A., Rosasco, L., and Lawrence, N. D. (2012). Kernels for vector-valued functions: A review.
Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 4(3):195–266.
Aronszajn, N. (1950). Theory of reproducing kernels.Transactions of the American Mathematical Society,
68(3):337–404.
Bach, F. R. (2008). Consistency of the group Lasso and multiple kernel learning.Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 9:1179–1225.
Brunzema, P., Tiao, L., Le, N., De Angeli, K., Xuan, Y ., and Gligorijevic, D. (2026). Agentic Bayesian
optimization through surrogate-augmented autoresearch.arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.00316.
Chen, Y ., Hosseini, B., Owhadi, H., and Stuart, A. M. (2021). Solving and learning nonlinear PDEs with
Gaussian processes.Journal of Computational Physics, 447:110668.
Cortes, C., Mohri, M., and Rostamizadeh, A. (2012). Algorithms for learning kernels based on centered
alignment.Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13:795–828.
Duvenaud, D., Lloyd, J. R., Grosse, R., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Ghahramani, Z. (2013). Structure discovery
in nonparametric regression through compositional kernel search. InProceedings of the International
Conference on Machine Learning.
Gärtner, T. (2003). A survey of kernels for structured data.ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter,
5(1):49–58.
Gneiting, T. and Raftery, A. E. (2007). Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation.Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 102(477):359–378.
Goldie, A. D., Wang, Z., Hayler, A., Nathani, D., Toledo, E., Thampiratwong, K., Kalisz, A., Beukman,
M., Letcher, A., Reddy, S., et al. (2026). DiscoGen: Procedural generation of algorithm discovery tasks
in machine learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.17863.
Griffiths, R.-R., Klarner, L., Moss, H. B., Ravuri, A., Truong, S., Du, Y ., Stanton, S., Tom, G., Rankovi´c,
B., Jamasb, A. R., et al. (2023). GAUCHE: A library for Gaussian processes in chemistry. InAdvances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36.
Halton, J. H. (1960). On the efficiency of certain quasi-random sequences of points in evaluating multi-
dimensional integrals.Numerische Mathematik, 2(1):84–90.
Hamzi, B. and Hutter, M. (2026). Toward an algorithmic theory of machine learning: Unifying machine
learning and algorithmic information theory via kernel methods. Preliminary research monograph. Draft
dated August 1, 2026. Preliminary lecture notes.
Kabra, S., Abhyankar, N., Desai, S., Iyer, P., and Reddy, C. K. (2026). LLM-AutoSciLab: Closed-loop
scientific discovery via active experimentation with LLMs.arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.24043.
Karpathy, A. (2026). Autoresearch: AI agents running research on single-GPU Nanochat training
automatically. https://github.com/karpathy/autoresearch. GitHub repository.
Kovatchev, B. P., Breton, M., Dalla Man, C., and Cobelli, C. (2009). In silico preclinical trials: A proof
of concept in closed-loop control of type 1 diabetes.Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology,
3(1):44–55.
Lloyd, J. R., Duvenaud, D., Grosse, R., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Ghahramani, Z. (2014). Automatic
construction and natural-language description of nonparametric regression models. InProceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1242–1250.
Loper, J., Blei, D., Cunningham, J. P., and Paninski, L. (2021). A general linear-time inference method for
Gaussian processes on one dimension.Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22:1–36.
Lotfi, S., Izmailov, P., Benton, G., Goldblum, M., and Wilson, A. G. (2022). Bayesian model selection, the
marginal likelihood, and generalization. InProceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 14223–14247. PMLR.
Malkomes, G., Schaff, C., and Garnett, R. (2016). Bayesian optimization for automated model selection.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Micchelli, C. A., Xu, Y ., and Zhang, H. (2006). Universal kernels.Journal of Machine Learning Research,
7:2651–2667.
Mouret, J.-B. and Clune, J. (2015). Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.04909.
Murphy, K. (2026). Model discovery agent: LLM-assisted Bayesian experiment design for data-efficient
discovery of mechanistic world models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.09696.
Nikitin, A., Kossen, J., Gal, Y ., and Marttinen, P. (2024). Kernel language entropy: Fine-grained uncertainty
quantification for LLMs from semantic similarities. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 37.
Novikov, A., V˜u, N., Eisenberger, M., Dupont, E., Huang, P.-S., Wagner, A. Z., Shirobokov, S., Kozlovskii,
B., Ruiz, F. J. R., Mehrabian, A., Kumar, M. P., See, A., Chaudhuri, S., Holland, G., Davies, A., Nowozin,
S., Kohli, P., and Balog, M. (2025). AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131.
Pineda-Arango, S., Jomaa, H. S., Wistuba, M., and Grabocka, J. (2021). HPO-B: A large-scale reproducible
benchmark for black-box HPO based on OpenML. InNeural Information Processing Systems Track on
Datasets and Benchmarks.
Rahimi, A. and Recht, B. (2007). Random features for large-scale kernel machines. InAdvances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 20.
Rasmussen, C. E. and Williams, C. K. I. (2006).Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning. MIT Press.
Rice, H. G. (1953). Classes of recursively enumerable sets and their decision problems.Transactions of
the American Mathematical Society, 74(2):358–366.
Romera-Paredes, B., Barekatain, M., Novikov, A., Balog, M., Kumar, M. P., Dupont, E., Ruiz, F. J. R.,
Ellenberg, J. S., Wang, P., Fawzi, O., Kohli, P., and Fawzi, A. (2024). Mathematical discoveries from
program search with large language models.Nature, 625(7995):468–475.
Saad, F., Burnim, J., Carroll, C., Patton, B., Köster, U., Saurous, R. A., and Hoffman, M. (2024). Scalable
spatiotemporal prediction with Bayesian neural fields.Nature Communications, 15:7942.
Saad, F. A., Patton, B. J., Hoffman, M. D., Saurous, R. A., and Mansinghka, V . K. (2023). Sequential
Monte Carlo learning for time series structure discovery. InProceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research.
Särkkä, S., Solin, A., and Hartikainen, J. (2013). Spatiotemporal learning via infinite-dimensional Bayesian
filtering and smoothing: A look at Gaussian process regression through Kalman filtering.IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, 30(4):51–61.
Shalev-Shwartz, S. and Ben-David, S. (2014).Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to
Algorithms. Cambridge University Press.
Singhal, S., Mishra, P., Malach, E., and Galanti, T. (2026). LLM priors for ERM over programs. In
Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 306 ofProceedings of
Machine Learning Research. arXiv:2510.14331.
Snoek, J., Swersky, K., Zemel, R. S., and Adams, R. P. (2014). Input warping for Bayesian optimization of
non-stationary functions. InProceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
1674–1682.
Sun, S., Zhang, G., Wang, C., Zeng, W., Li, J., and Grosse, R. (2018). Differentiable compositional kernel
learning for Gaussian processes. InProceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning.
Suwandi, R. C., Lin, Z., Yin, F., Wang, Z., and Theodoridis, S. (2025a). Sparsity-aware distributed learning
for Gaussian processes with linear multiple kernel.IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, 36(8):14869–14883.
Suwandi, R. C., Yin, F., Wang, J., Li, R., Chang, T.-H., and Theodoridis, S. (2025b). Adaptive kernel
design for Bayesian optimization is a piece of CAKE with LLMs. InAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 38.
Williams, C. K. I. and Seeger, M. (2001). Using the Nyström method to speed up kernel machines. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 13.
Wilson, A. G. and Adams, R. P. (2013). Gaussian process kernels for pattern discovery and extrapolation.
InProceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Wilson, A. G., Hu, Z., Salakhutdinov, R., and Xing, E. P. (2016). Deep kernel learning. InProceedings of
the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Wistuba, M. and Grabocka, J. (2021). Few-shot Bayesian optimization with deep kernel surrogates. In
International Conference on Learning Representations.
Xie, J. (2018). Simglucose v0.2.1. https://github.com/jxx123/simglucose.
Yun, T., Shin, W., Song, I., Lee, J., and Park, J. (2026). Automated kernel discovery towards understanding
high-dimensional Bayesian optimization.arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.20249.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Appendix Guide
The appendix is organized as follows.
• Method (Appendix A).The validity guarantee and its proof, implementation and evaluation details, the
soundness of validation selection, and a stress test of numerical validity checks.
• Prediction and optimization on BBO benchmarks (Appendix B).The function-family splits, predictive
CRPS evaluation, separate GP-based BO protocol and regret results, baselines and controls, ablations,
and robustness checks.
• The DWF kernel (Appendix C).A detailed analysis of the discovered kernel, covering its geometry,
theoretical properties, and controlled comparisons.
•Time-series forecasting (Appendix D).Experimental setup and full results.
• Scientific structure discovery (Appendix E).Experimental setup and full results for enzyme kinetics
and glucose dynamics.
• Transfer and interpretation (Appendix F).Cross-domain reuse of discovered kernels and plain-
language descriptions of what they encode.
• Scope and future extensions (Appendix G).The scope of the current experiments and directions for
extending the framework.
•LLM prompts (Appendix H).The agent interface and the prompts given to the coding agents.
A Method: Further Details
This appendix supports §3. We first prove the construction guarantee and the approximation power of the
feature contract. We then specify the implementation defaults, the acceptance checks, and the soundness of
validation selection, and we close with the verification experiments. Mathematical results are stated in
exact arithmetic, and computational limits are specified separately.
A.1 PSD Preservation Under Trusted Assembly
The argument has two parts. Part (a) shows that every matrix the interpreter assembles is symmetric and
PSD whenever the components return finite outputs of the declared shape. Part (b) adds purity, which
makes those matrices the Gram matrices of one kernel function on the whole domain.
Proof.(a)Fix finite-valued inputsx 1, . . . , xn.
Feature map.The interpreter evaluates φθ once per input and stacks the outputs as the rows of Ξ∈R n×m,
then sets K= ΞΞ ⊤. Symmetry is immediate, and c⊤Kc=∥Ξ ⊤c∥2
2 ≥0 for every c∈R n. The same row
ofΞenters both the row and the column ofK, so the identity holds whether or notφ θ is pure.
Spectral.The weights wj =r 2
j /M are nonnegative for any real rj. Define ψ(x) =√wj cosω ⊤
j x, √wj sinω ⊤
j x
M
j=1 ∈R 2M . The angle-difference identity cosacosb+ sinasinb=
cos(a−b) gives ψ(x)⊤ψ(y) = P
j wj cos(ω⊤
j (x−y)) . The interpreter forms K= ΨΨ ⊤, so the
feature-map case applies.
Pullback.Let zi =T θ(xi)∈R m, where repeated values are allowed. Then Kij =k 0(zi, zj), which is the
Gram matrix ofk 0 onz 1, . . . , zn. That matrix is symmetric and PSD becausek 0 is PSD onR m.
Closure.The argument is a structural induction on the tree. Leaves give symmetric PSD Gram matrices,
either from the trusted library or from the three cases above. Suppose two subtrees give symmetric PSD
matrices K1 and K2. Then K1 +K 2 and cK1 for c≥0 are symmetric PSD. The entrywise product
K1 ◦K 2 is symmetric PSD by the Schur product theorem.
(b)Under purity, each component defines a function on X0. Thus, κθ(x, y) has one well-defined real value
for each pair (x, y)∈ X 2
0 . This value does not depend on the batch that contains the pair. For any n and
any x1, . . . , xn ∈ X 0, the matrix [κθ(xi, xj)]ij is exactly the matrix that the interpreter assembles on that
batch. Part (a) shows that this matrix is symmetric and PSD. Therefore, κθ satisfies Definition 1 for the
fixedθ. Applying the same argument to everyθ∈Θproves thatκis valid.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Scope of the guarantee.The proposition certifies the interpreter’s assembly when the components meet
the stated assumptions. We restrict component behavior through the interface and static source checks, then
probe consistency on sampled batches using the relations in Table 3. These checks assess conformance,
while the kernel-function guarantee assumes purity over the full stated domain. Nonnegative residual and
additive combinations follow from the closure case.
A.2 Approximation Power of the Feature Contract
The feature contract restricts how components are assembled, but it need not restrict approximation
to a fixed kernel library. The following result makes this distinction precise as feature dimension and
computational resources grow.
Proposition 2(Uniform approximation by certified features).Let X ⊂R d be compact and let k be a real
continuous PSD kernel on X . For every ε >0 , there are m <∞ and a polynomial map φ:R d →R m
with rational coefficients such that
sup
x,y∈X
|k(x, y)−φ(x) ⊤φ(y)|< ε.(3)
The approximating kernel is admitted by the mathematical feature-map contract in exact arithmetic.
Proof. Let kx =k(x,·) be the canonical feature of x in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). It is
continuous because ∥kx −k y∥2 =k(x, x) +k(y, y)−2k(x, y) , so {kx :x∈ X } is compact and bounded
by some M <∞ . Choose a finite η-net in this image, let V be its span, and let PV be the orthogonal
projection. Thensup x ∥(I−P V )kx∥ ≤η. Orthogonality gives
|k(x, y)− ⟨P V kx, PV ky⟩| ≤η 2.
In an orthonormal basis of V , the projected coordinates form a continuous map z:X →R m. By
Stone–Weierstrass, approximate its coordinates uniformly by polynomials. Rational approximation of
their finitely many coefficients preserves uniform approximation on the compact domain. Choose the
resulting φ with supx ∥z(x)−φ(x)∥ ≤δ . Since supx ∥z(x)∥ ≤M , the extra inner-product error is at
most 2M δ+δ 2. Choose η, δ so that η2 + 2M δ+δ 2 < ε. The case k= 0 is represented exactly by the
zero feature.
This applies classical feature-space approximation arguments (Aronszajn, 1950; Micchelli et al., 2006) to
the construction interface. Each approximant has a finite executable description, but its degree, dimension,
and evaluation cost may grow with accuracy. The proposition supplies neither an efficient synthesis
algorithm nor a uniform guarantee under the runtime cap, floating-point arithmetic, or an arbitrary
parameter range. It does not assert a complete verifier for unrestricted programs.
Feature maps can also define nonstationary kernels. Unless φ has a special form, such as random Fourier
features, φ(x)⊤φ(y) depends on x and y separately rather than only on x−y . For example, φ(x) =x
gives the linear kernel xy. Its diagonal is x2, which is not constant. Therefore, no combination of stationary
kernels can approximate it uniformly on [0,1] . A grammar that includes a linear base kernel already
contains xy. The value of the feature-map contract is broader: agents can write arbitrary feature maps,
including the saturation features discovered for enzyme kinetics (Appendix E.1).
A.3 Implementation Details
This section specifies the implementation defaults in the order used by a discovery run. The scheduler
chooses what to revise, the tuner searches parameters, the fitness and novelty rules decide what enters the
archive, and the contract interfaces specify the permitted component computations.
Run scheduler.A run starts as an independent root with probability pnew, and always while the archive
is empty. Otherwise it selects a parent from the quality-diversity elites. The scheduler draws the parent
uniformly from all elites with probability punif and from the top ktop elites by selection score otherwise.
These draws balance exploration and exploitation. When the run revises a parent, it also samples up tokinsp
inspirations from elites outside the scheduler-assigned target niche, and a root run samples its inspirations
from all elites. In all experiments we use pnew =p unif = 0.35 and ktop =k insp = 3. The run budget is
B= 12 for BBO and forecasting and B= 8 for chemistry. If every elite lies in the target niche, it samples
from the other elites, so the prompt is not confined to the parent.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
input geometry
spectral, periodic
feature projection
additive interaction
multires., local
residual composite
open-ended
Ensemble (E1)
1
2
3
after run 3
1
2
3
4
after run 6
1
2
3
4
7
8
after run 9
1
2
3
4
7
8
10
11
after run 12
duplicatenear ref.distinct
strongly distinct
input geometry
spectral, periodic
feature projection
additive interaction
multires., local
residual composite
open-ended
GPT-6 Astra (F1)
1
2
3
duplicatenear ref.distinct
strongly distinct
1
2
3
4
5
6
duplicatenear ref.distinct
strongly distinct
8
9
3
4
5
6
7
duplicatenear ref.distinct
strongly distinct
8
9
3
4
5
6
7
10
11
12
0.525 0.550 0.575 0.600 0.625 0.650
Elite validation CRPS (lower is better)
Figure 6:The archive fills niche by niche over a campaign.MAP-Elites archive cells after runs 3, 6,
9, and 12 for the first ensemble campaign (E1, top) and the first GPT-6 Astra campaign (F1, bottom).
Rows are niches and columns are novelty bands. Each filled cell shows its current elite (best search score),
colored by validation CRPS (darker is better) and labeled with the run that produced it. A ring marks the
validation-selected program, which is DWF in the first run of E1. Cells are indexed by niche and novelty
band only, so the feature-growth descriptor of Equation (4) is omitted.
The seven niches are input geometry, spectral and periodic structure, feature projection, additive interaction,
multiresolution and local structure, residual composites, and an open-ended niche. The task prompt defines
these labels, and the agent declares one label in its formulation (Appendix H). The scheduler fills empty
niches before it cycles through occupied ones. We store formulations, candidate drafts, and parameter trials
separately, so a tuning trial never becomes an evolutionary descendant. Formally, each accepted candidate
κoccupies a cell
c(κ) =

niche(κ),growth(κ),band(κ)

,(4)
where niche(κ) is the declared construction niche, growth(κ) the feature-growth descriptor, and band(κ)
the novelty band, obtained by bucketing the functional-novelty distance dnov of Equation (2) into four
bands: duplicate (dnov <0.03 ), near_reference (<0.08 ), distinct (<0.15 ), and strongly_distinct (≥0.15 ).
Each cell keeps only its best-scoring candidate as the elite. Figure 6 shows how the grid fills over a
campaign.
Algorithm 2 shows the session inside one run. In each round the model chooses a tool, and the backend’s
result stays in the session so the next round can revise. A failed check therefore costs a round but does
not start a new session, and a tuning trial is never an archive member. A program enters the archive only
when the session returns a search score, and it replaces an elite only within its own cell. Algorithm 3 is a
separate procedure that runs after the search ends. It ranks frozen programs by validation CRPS alone, so
search scores and cell membership play no role. Test outcomes are opened once, after the validation choice
is fixed.
Lineage classification.A candidate with no declared parent is an independent root. Any other candidate
counts as a genuine revision only when its parsed source differs from its parent’s, so a pure hyperparameter
change is classified as superficial.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Algorithm 2One agent session
1:Config:round budgetN round, tool-call budgetN call, tuning budgetN tune
2:Agent actions(structured tool calls that trusted backend code executes):
3: propose_formulation.Store the fields in Table 4, including a niche, and return a formulation ID. If a
field is missing, return its name to the same session.
4: stage_candidate.Send the Python source directly in the tool call with its formulation ID, initial
setting, and parameter ranges. Store the draft. Reject a cited parent whose parsed source is unchanged.
5: verify_staged_candidate.Tier 0 checks execution and shape, Tier 1 checks sampled positive semidef-
initeness, and Tier 2 checks contract assembly and purity. On failure, return the diagnostic to the same
session so the agent can revise the draft in a later round. A failed draft does not enter the archive.
Novelty affects the score after verification, but it does not cause a verification failure.
6:optimize_parameters.Score the initial setting and up toN tune −1Halton settings onD tr only.
7: submit_staged_candidate.Repeat the Tier-2 checks at the best setting, and freeze the program if they
pass.
8:evaluate_candidate.Score that frozen program by Equation (5) and attach the cell of Equation (4).
9: query_archiveorinspect_candidate.Return stored program metadata and source to the session. The
agent does not receive file-system paths.
10:
11:functionAGENTSESSION(niche ⋆,parent,I, D tr)
12:open a fresh session showing the task, nicheniche ⋆, the parent, and inspirationsI
13:forr= 1, . . . , N round do
14: query the model and run its tool calls (at most Ncall in total) ▷ results return to the same session
15:ifthe reply has no tool callthen
16:return(∅,·,·)▷the agent gave up
17:end if
18:ifa call scored a Tier-2 programκthen
19:return(κ,search score, c(κ))▷back to Alg. 1
20:end if
21:end for
22:return(∅,·,·)▷out of rounds
23:end function
Parameter tuning.The optimize_parameters tool uses a gradient-free search over the parameters
that a program declares. For each parameter, the agent specifies a linear or logarithmic range or an ordered
list of categorical values. For a Halton coordinate u∈[0,1) and J choices, the tuner selects choice
min(⌊J u⌋, J−1) . The backend evaluates the agent’s initial setting and up toNtune −1 additional settings
from a deterministic Halton sequence (Halton, 1960). It returns the setting with the best meta-training
score. This procedure supports discrete parameters and agent-written programs that are not differentiable.
It also gives every candidate a fixed tuning budget. The default is 16 trials, with a maximum of 64. We use
64 trials for BBO and forecasting and 32 for chemistry.
A Halton sequence distributes the settings across the declared ranges. Each parameter uses a different
prime base from 2 through 37, so the tuner supports at most 12 parameters. Tuning uses only meta-training
episodes. Its predictive protocol is cheaper than final evaluation because it uses fewer observations, fewer
held-out points, and one episode per family. A BBO tuning trial uses n= 4 + 2d training points and 16
held-out points. A forecasting tuning trial uses a 24-month horizon. The backend repeats the Tier 2 checks
on the best setting before freezing the program.
The tuner changes only parameters that the agent exposes. For example, every accepted forecasting
program computes its raw spectral weights from exposed parameters. Tuning therefore determines these
weights rather than retaining the LLM’s initial values. Trial fitness also subtracts the heuristic complexity
penalty 10−3 log(1 +p) for p exposed parameters. We fixed this coefficient before the campaigns. Since
p≤12 , the penalty is at most 0.0026 on the relative-improvement score scale. It is constant across one
program’s trials, so it cannot change which setting the tuner selects. It does not enter the archive selection
score of Equation (5). It only shifts the tuning scores that the agent sees for programs with different
parameter counts.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Algorithm 3Validation selection and sealed test evaluation
1:functionVALIDATIONSELECT(C, D val, Dtest)
2:foreach frozen programκ∈ Cdo
3: bRval(κ)←mean CRPS onD val ▷structure fixed, only amplitude and noise refit
4:end for
5:κ ⋆ ←arg min κ∈C bRval(κ)▷search scores and cells play no role
6:returnκ ⋆ and its score onD test ▷test is opened once, after the choice
7:end function
Selection score.For BBO, a program’s score on meta-training episodes combines four relative im-
provements over the tuned baselines. For every lower-is-better metric q, the relative improvement is
(qbase −q cand)/qbase: ∆C, the mean relative CRPS improvement over the best baseline on each episode,
∆AUC and ∆F, the improvements in regret AUC and final regret over the best baseline, and∆W, the CRPS
improvement on the worst family. The BBO score is
sBBO =w C∆C +w AUC∆AUC +w F∆F +w W∆W −Ω stab −Ω nov,(5)
For domains without BBO diagnostics, the score is
spred = ∆C −Ω stab −Ω nov.(6)
The Thompson-sampling bandit of Appendix B.1 uses the applicable score as its reward. The BBO score
has nonnegative weights wC, wAUC, wF, wW, where Ωstab = 0.01 max(0,log 10 cond(K)−4) penalizes
ill-conditioned Gram matrices and Ωnov is the novelty penalty below. We use (wC, wAUC, wF, wW) =
(0.55,0.30,0.10,0.05) , which makes predictive quality the main objective, gives regret AUC a substantial
secondary role, and uses smaller terms for final regret and worst-family robustness. These values were
fixed before the campaigns and were not fitted to validation or test results. The weights guide search only:
they decide which programs become elites, and the bandit uses the applicable score as its reward. The
frozen program that we report is chosen by validation CRPS alone (§4.1), so the weights cannot change it
directly. The sensitivity analysis below checks how much they matter.
Novelty penalty.With the functional novelty distance dnov in Equation (2) and a threshold τnov fixed
before evaluation, the penalty is
Ωnov =λ nov max

0, τnov −d nov
τnov

1−min

γmax(∆ C,0),1

.(7)
The first factor grows linearly as the candidate moves closer to a reference kernel, up to λnov. The second
factor removes the penalty for a candidate that is clearly better, shrinking linearly to zero at a CRPS
improvement of 1/γ. A weak near-duplicate pays the full penalty, while a strong one is kept. We use
τnov = 0.08, λnov = 0.1, and γ= 5 , so the penalty vanishes at a 20% improvement. The penalty has
no units, because dnov is compared with a fixed threshold and the second factor uses a relative CRPS
improvement. It therefore does not depend on the raw scale of CRPS. In practice it rarely applied. Across
the 14 BBO campaigns, 4 of the 160 scored discoveries paid a nonzero penalty, and the largest was 0.073.
Weight sensitivity.We check how much the weights (wC, wAUC, wF, wW) of the selection score s in
Equation (5) matter by re-scoring the discovered candidates of the first BBO archive under other weightings.
Nine of the ten have all four components ∆C,∆ AUC,∆ F,∆ W stored, so we re-score these nine. Besides
the original weights, we try an AUC-heavy setting that swaps the original CRPS and AUC weights and
keeps the final-regret and worst-family weights, an equal-weight setting, and an extreme CRPS-only setting
that sets all other weights to zero. For each setting we record where DWF ranks among the nine and how
many of the nine would still be archive elites (Table 1).
DWF ranks first under every weighting, and the top-three order is unchanged: DWF, simple spectral warp,
then reversed index-bump dual-frequency warp. All nine programs also stay elites. The CRPS-only setting
keeps this order and has Kendall’sτ= 0.89 against the original ranking. Under it, the top-three pool after
three intermediate runs differs, but the final pool does not. The ordering of discovered programs therefore
does not hinge on the weights we chose. This replay is not a counterfactual rerun, because different
rewards could have changed parent selection and the later proposals. The reported kernel is anyway chosen
by validation CRPS alone. Among all ten frozen discoveries, including the one without stored search
components, DWF has the lowest validation CRPS at0.540, followed by simple spectral warp at0.553.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 1: Sensitivity of the first BBO archive to the selection weights. Each row re-scores the nine programs
under one weighting of (∆C,∆ AUC,∆ F,∆ W) in Equation (5), using the four stored components. “DWF
rank” is the position of DWF among the nine by search score, where 1 is best. “Elites kept” counts the
programs that remain elites of their cells.
Weighting Weights DWF rank Elites kept
Original(.55, .30, .10, .05)1 9/9
AUC-heavy(.30, .55, .10, .05)1 9/9
Equal(.25, .25, .25, .25)1 9/9
CRPS-only(1,0,0,0)1 9/9
Table 2: Implemented evidence ladder.
T Label What is established
0 Executable Sandboxed execution succeeds and the output matches the interface
1 Empirical Randomized Gram-matrix tests pass on sampled input sets
2 Contract certified Checked interface conformance and trusted PSD-preserving assembly
under the stated component assumptions
Contract interfaces.A feature-map or pullback candidate implements a point function that the interpreter
calls once per input and checks for finite outputs of one fixed dimension. A spectral candidate implements
spectral_components(input_dimension,parameters) and returns frequencies together with raw
weights that are computed from tuned parameters, and the interpreter squares the raw weights so any real
value gives a nonnegative spectral measure.3 Certified source cannot use module-level state, randomness,
reflection, decorators, or mutable defaults.
A.4 Evaluation and Registration Details
This section specifies how a candidate is checked, how a formulation is registered, and how the reported
scores are computed. The ladder says what each tier establishes. The fingerprint and the CRPS formula
then make the novelty score and the predictive metric fully explicit.
Evidence ladder.
Tier 0 and Tier 1.Tier 0 runs each candidate in isolated subprocess trials, with 8 trials of 12 points
drawn from a seeded N(0, I) for each declared input dimension. Tier 1 adds an empirical PSD test on
each trial’s Gram matrixK,
λmin
 1
2(K+K ⊤)

≥ −η,max
i,j
|Kij −K ji| ≤η(8)
with tolerance η= 10 −8, a numerical check of the PSD condition in Equation (1). A failed execution stops
the candidate at Tier 0, and a failure of Equation (8) stops it at Tier 1.
Contract-conformance checks.Tier 2 also tests the five metamorphic relations in Table 3, with 2 trials
of 12 points for each declared dimension. For example, if X ′ appends new points to X, the upper-left
block of K(X ′, X′) must equal K(X, X) . For each relation, we compare the interpreter’s Gram matrixK
on the transformed batch with the matrix ˆK implied by its Gram matrix on the original batch (for example
a permuted or truncated copy), and we require
err(K, ˆK) = maxi,j|Kij − ˆKij|
max

maxi,j|Kij|,1
 ≤ε,(9)
withε= 1.1×10 −7.
3Our task prompts describe frequencies in cycles per unit, while the interpreter uses angular frequency,cos(ω⊤(x−
y)) without a factor 2π. Validity is unaffected, and every reported score uses the interpreter’s convention, but a
registered description can misstate the period of a spectral program by this factor.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 3: Tier 2 contract-conformance relations. See Equation (9).
Relation What must match
Determinism The same input, replayed twice
Permutation The Gram of a permuted batch equals the permuted Gram
Subset The Gram of a random subset equals the corresponding submatrix
Extension Appending then truncating points reproduces the original block
Duplicate A duplicated point reproduces its own row
Table 4: Formulation fields registered before code submission (§3.4).
Field Purpose
mathematical_formKernel expression and construction
psd_argumentProof sketch for positive semidefiniteness
novelty_claimWhat is new relative to known kernels
closest_known_kernelNearest baseline and how this differs
expected_bo_behaviorPredicted BBO performance characteristics
construction_nicheDeclared construction category
equivalence_analysisWhy this is not equivalent to a known kernel
optimized_parametersSuggested initial parameter values
domain_scale_analysisInput-scale and periodicity considerations
irrelevant_coordinate_mechanismHow irrelevant inputs are handled
cross_coordinate_mechanismHow input coordinates interact
falsification_testA test that would disconfirm the proposal
feature_growthHow feature dimension scales with input
expected_conditioningExpected Gram matrix condition number
Sandbox implementation.Each Gram evaluation runs in its own subprocess, under a 20 s wall-clock
limit, 1024 MB of memory, 15 s of central processing unit (CPU) time, 64 open files, and 1 MB of captured
output (truncated). The environment is restricted to single-threaded Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms
(BLAS), and the hash seed is fixed so a replay follows the same code paths. The sandbox keeps a failing
program from taking down the rest of the run. Code from an untrusted third party would need a container
backend for stronger isolation.
Formulation fields.Before any code is submitted (§3.4), the agent registers the 14 fields in Table 4. The
backend stores these strings and returns a formulation identifier. The later staging call sends that identifier
with the Python source, so it does not repeat the strings or pass a file path. The fields state the agent’s
intended construction and predicted behavior. They are not verification results. The backend uses only the
declared niche and feature growth to index the archive. Researchers use the other fields to inspect novelty
claims and compare intended behavior with the frozen program. Trusted execution determines acceptance
and numerical scores. Appendix H shows the exact tool schema and examples. Discovery mode excludes a
trivial rediscovery of a closure baseline. Closure may still combine a genuinely new certified primitive
with a safe baseline.
Behavioral fingerprint.Equation (2) compares kernels through the normalized centered Gram matrices
¯Kκ(Xd). For each probe dimension d∈ D={2,5,8} , the probe set Xd is a fixed set of nprobe = 16
points drawn uniformly from [0,1] d with a fixed seed, so every kernel is compared on the same inputs. Let
Kκ(Xd)∈R n×n be the Gram matrix ofκonX d, and letH=I− 1
n 11⊤ be the centering matrix. Then
¯Kκ(Xd) = HK κ(Xd)H
∥HK κ(Xd)H∥ F
.(10)
For centered Frobenius norm below 10−12, the implementation returns the zero matrix. Otherwise, squared
fingerprint distance is two minus twice centered kernel alignment (Cortes et al., 2012). Centering removes
the constant direction and normalization removes positive amplitude. This is a covariance-shape diagnostic,
not a guarantee of predictive equivalence.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Continuous ranked probability score.For a Gaussian predictive distribution N(µ, σ 2) and an observed
value y, write z= (y−µ)/σ , let ϕ be the standard normal density, and let Φ be the standard normal
cumulative distribution function (CDF). The closed form (Gneiting and Raftery, 2007) is
CRPS

N(µ, σ 2), y

=σ
h
z

2Φ(z)−1

+ 2ϕ(z)− 1√π
i
.(11)
We report the mean of Equation (11) over held-out points, taking the GP posterior mean and variance at
each point asµandσ 2.
A.5 Soundness of Validation Selection
Search proposes and tunes programs using meta-training episodes only. Validation then chooses one of the
resulting frozen programs (§4.1). Because the validation episodes play no role in search, choosing among
the frozen programs is an ordinary model-selection problem over a finite set, and the standard argument
applies.
Setup.Let κ1, . . . , κN be the N frozen programs that enter validation, each with its search-time param-
eters fixed. Let E be the distribution of meta-validation episodes, which first picks a family uniformly
at random and then draws an episode from it. For an episode e, let L(κ, e) be the score of κ after the
backend refits amplitude and noise on the episode’s training points, for example the mean held-out CRPS
of Equation (11). Lower scores are better. Proposition 3 assumes that every score lies in [0,L max]. The
reported evaluator does not clip CRPS, so the proposition is a conditional model-selection result rather
than a certificate for the realized finite sample. Validation usesm independent episodes e1, . . . , em, with
the same number drawn from each family. Define
R(κ) =E e∼E

L(κ, e)

, bR(κ) = 1
m
mX
j=1
L(κ, ej),ˆκ∈arg min
i≤N
bR(κi).
R(κ) is the expected score on a fresh validation episode, bR(κ) is its empirical estimate, and ˆκis the
program that validation selects.
Proposition 3(Validation selection).Suppose the candidates κ1, . . . , κN are independent of the meta-
validation episodes. Then for everyδ∈(0,1), with probability at least1−δ,
R(ˆκ)≤min
i≤N
R(κi) +L max
r
2 log(2N/δ)
m .
Proof. Condition on the candidates. For each i, the scores L(κi, e1), . . . ,L(κi, em) are independent
and lie in [0,L max], and their mean has expectation R(κi) because every family contributes equally.
Hoeffding’s inequality gives Pr

|bR(κi)−R(κ i)| ≥t

≤2e −2mt2/L2
max. A union bound over the N
candidates with t=L max
p
log(2N/δ)/(2m) gives |bR(κi)−R(κ i)|< t for all i with probability at least
1−δ . On this event, for i⋆ ∈arg min i R(κi), R(ˆκ)<bR(ˆκ) +t≤bR(κi⋆) +t < R(κ i⋆) + 2t. The bound
holds for every candidate set, and hence unconditionally.
Proposition 3 applies the standard generalization bound for empirical risk minimization over a finite
hypothesis class (Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014, Chapter 4). The bound depends on the number of
programs that reach validation. It does not depend on program length, the size of the program space, or the
number of search proposals. If selection reused the search episodes, the guarantee would need to cover
every program that the proposer could generate. Such bounds grow with program length (Singhal et al.,
2026). Separate search and validation splits therefore preserve the finite-selection guarantee despite the
open-ended program space. The same condition explains why a kernel selected in hindsight on evaluation
data can have an optimistic score and fail to transfer. The best discovery on SF 6 provides one example
(§4.3.2).
The cost of validation.The gap grows only as √logN in the number of candidates but shrinks as1/√m
in the number of validation episodes. Adding candidates is therefore cheap for the bound, while tightening
it requires more validation episodes. Validation episodes are not free. In BO, scoring a program on an
episode can require a full rollout of several acquisition steps on a fresh task, and in a real application every
such episode costs function evaluations.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
What the guarantee covers.
• Families.The guarantee applies to the meta-validation families. Transfer to the withheld meta-test
families is established empirically (§4.3).
• Independence.The assumption holds for BBO, whose episodes use disjoint seeds. It holds
approximately for forecasting, whose windows partly overlap.
• Selection only.The guarantee covers the choice among proposed programs. How often the
proposer produces a strong candidate is measured empirically, since KERNAUT’s proposals
depend on the archive and are not independent draws.
• Constants.The bound is loose at our sample sizes. For the BBO campaign, with N= 10 , m= 50
and δ= 0.05 , the gap term is about 0.49Lmax. The paired intervals of §4.3 are what show which
kernel is better.
Why a held-out score rather than the marginal likelihood.The log marginal likelihood measures
how probable the training data are under the prior, but this training-data criterion can favor a prior that
explains observed inputs without producing the best posterior predictions on new inputs (Lotfi et al., 2022).
KERNAUTtherefore uses the marginal likelihood only to refit amplitude and noise within an episode, and
selects programs by held-out CRPS on episodes that search never saw.
A.6 Randomized Screening Stress Test
This experiment asks whether a finite numerical screen can stand in for a validity proof. We fixed the
candidate generator, the public screen, and a withheld suite before looking at any outcome. The main
counts include all parseable programs produced by the model, without manual selection. Diagnostic
canaries and certified controls then check that the protocol catches known blind spots and still accepts
valid constructions.
Unrestricted candidate generation.We asked the ensemble proposer for 40 kernel programs, in
eight independent calls of five candidates each. Each response supplied Python source implementing
kernel_matrix(x, parameters) with only NumPy or math, together with a parameter dictionary and
a short rationale. The prompt asked for mathematically diverse kernels on inputs of unknown dimension,
and it said that acceptance would use a finite randomized PSD screen. It did not reveal the withheld
tests, and it did not require a feature-map, closure, pullback, or spectral construction. We kept all 40
parseable responses, with no manual selection. We ran this generation twice with the same prompt, and
once with a formulation-first prompt that additionally required a complete proof sketch, before the code,
that each program returns a symmetric PSD matrix for every input set, size, and dimension, with each entry
depending only on its own pair of points. This mirrors the formulation step of the search (§3.4). Each
execution ran in a sandbox with a 20-second wall-clock limit, 15 CPU seconds, 1 GB of memory, and a
1 MB output limit.
Frozen randomized screen.The Tier-1 screen evaluates each program on eight independent matrices
X∈R 12×2 drawn fromN(0, I). For each resulting Gram matrixK, it requires
max
i,j
|Kij −K ji| ≤10 −8,
λmin

(K+K ⊤)/2

≥ −10 −8.
(12)
A program must also execute successfully and return the required matrix shape on all eight trials. We
freeze the program bank after this screen, and only the programs that pass proceed to the unseen suite.
Unseen inputs and consistency checks.The withheld suite contained 84 Gram-matrix cases, spanning
input dimensions d∈ {1,2,3,5,8,16,32} and matrix sizes from 5 to 64. It included standard-normal and
uniform inputs, coordinate scales from 10−4 to 104, large translations, and duplicated, nearly duplicated,
collinear, and tightly clustered points. Forty of the 84 cases were randomized mixtures of dimension, matrix
size, distribution, scale, and translation. We applied the symmetry and eigenvalue criteria of Equation (12)
to every case.
We also checked determinism, permutation equivariance, and consistency under subsetting, extension,
and duplication, in dimensions 2 and 8. These relations are necessary for a program to define a pairwise
21

--- Page 22 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
0 10 20 30 40 50
programs
Unrestricted, screen prompt, run 1
Unrestricted, screen prompt, run 2
Unrestricted, formulation-ﬁrst prompt
Diagnostic canaries
Certiﬁed controls (Tier 2)
3 2 12 23 12/35 falsiﬁed
9 18 13 18/31 falsiﬁed
1 2 8 29 8/37 falsiﬁed
5 5/5 falsiﬁed
4 none falsiﬁed
fails to run fails public screen passes screen, falsiﬁed on hidden suite survives hidden suite
Figure 7:Finite numerical screening admits invalid programs.Outcome of each cohort of kernel
programs, split into programs that fail to run, fail the public Tier-1 screen, pass it but are falsified on the
hidden suite, and survive the hidden suite. Labels give the number falsified among the programs that
passed the public screen. Canaries were written to pass the public screen and fail the hidden suite. Certified
controls pass Tier 2. Unrestricted programs that survive the hidden suite are empirically unfalsified, not
certified.
kernel. In particular, if X ′ is formed by appending Z to X, the upper-left block of K(X ′, X′) must equal
K(X, X) , because the covariance assigned to a fixed pair cannot depend on unrelated points elsewhere in
the batch. We marked relative discrepancies above10 −7 + 10−8 as failures.
Controls and canaries.Four Tier 2 controls cover the four certified interfaces, and five diagnostic
canaries were written to pass the public draws and then fail on an untested dimension, size, range,
duplicated point, or batch-dependent normalization. The canaries are excluded from the headline counts.
Results and failure modes.The hidden suite exposes failures that the public screen misses (Figure 7). In
the first run, of 40 unrestricted programs, three fail to execute and two produce an indefinite Gram matrix
during the public screen, leaving 35 Tier-1 passes. The hidden suite falsifies 12 of these. Six produce a
non-PSD matrix, six violate a kernel-consistency relation, and two fail on an unseen shape. Two programs
fail in more than one category.
The diagnostic cohorts behaved as intended in every run. All five canaries passed Tier 1 and were then
falsified, and all four certified controls survived all 84 input cases and all consistency checks. The
experiment demonstrates the practical limitation of the finite screen. In the first run it admitted 12 programs
whose failures showed up only on a broader, and still finite, evaluation. The unrestricted programs that
survived remain empirically unfalsified, and they are not certified.
Repeated generation and a formulation-first prompt.The second run with the same prompt admits 18
invalid programs among 31 passes, so the failure rate varies across generations. Of these 18 programs, 16
violate a consistency relation, usually because they normalize by statistics from the whole batch. Requiring
a PSD argument before code reduces the failure rate to 8 of 37. The reduction is significant against the
second run alone (Fisher exact p= 0.003 ) and against both screen runs pooled (p= 0.02 ). However, the
formulation-first prompt does not eliminate invalid programs. Most remaining failures are implementation
errors beneath a correct argument, such as parameter vectors sized for two input dimensions. Thus, a
correct PSD argument does not make the submitted code a valid kernel on the full domain. Trusted
assembly closes this gap.
Live screening test.We also test whether relaxing acceptance changes the live search. We rerun the
BBO ablation protocol with a Tier-1 acceptance gate, keeping the proposer, context, and construction
contracts identical to the full-archive arm. Across five seeded campaigns and 49 accepted candidates, the
relaxed gate admits no extra program. Every accepted candidate also passes Tier 2.
The program bank and live search therefore answer different questions. The bank shows that finite
numerical screening can accept invalid programs, and that a PSD argument written before the code does
not prevent this. The live search admits no such program because its task context offers only the contract
interfaces. Every accepted program therefore supplies point functions or frequencies, the interpreter
22

--- Page 23 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
assembles the Gram matrix, and the relaxed gate has nothing extra to admit. Appendix B.5 gives the search
protocol.
Live search with unrestricted programs admitted.We then extend the task context so that the agent
may also submit an unrestricted kernel_matrix program, accepted once it passes the Tier-1 screen. This
arm uses the ensemble proposer. Across three seeded campaigns, the agent produces 35 accepted programs,
and every one uses a construction contract. The task context describes the contract interfaces in more
detail than the unrestricted option, which may favor contracts. On the withheld suite, no accepted program
yields an indefinite matrix or violates a consistency relation. Six raise an error on a 16-dimensional
input, twice the benchmark’s maximum input dimension, because they size parameter arrays for at most
eight coordinates. The interpreter then rejects the call instead of returning a matrix. Under the contracts,
failures are therefore loud and confined to inputs outside the benchmark’s domain, whereas the unrestricted
programs in the bank fail silently. The three validation-selected kernels reach test CRPS 0.581, 0.604, and
0.610, each below the fixed Matérn-5/2 reference (0.612).
B Prediction and Optimization on BBO Benchmarks
This appendix supports §4.3.1. It gives the shared function-family benchmark and search configuration,
the predictive CRPS results, the separate GP-based BO protocol and regret results with paired tests, and
the controls against meta-learned deep kernels and CAKE. It also reports the search ablations, the frontier
proposer, and the robustness checks on a broader benchmark.
B.1 Protocol and Search Configuration
This section gives the shared task split, the predictive CRPS protocol used in §4.3.1, and the separate
GP-based BO protocol evaluated by regret. It also specifies the baseline grids and the ensemble used for
these BBO benchmark experiments.
Task families and splits.Training and validation use Branin ( d= 2 ), Ackley (d= 2 ), Cosine (d= 8 ),
Hartmann-6 (d= 6 ), and Levy ( d= 6 ). Test-only families are Bukin ( d= 2 ), Drop-Wave (d= 2 ),
Griewank (d= 5), Hölder Table (d= 2), Rosenbrock (d= 6), and Rastrigin (d= 6).
Episodes apply optimum-preserving randomizations drawn from a seeded generator. The seed of episode
j of family i is o+ 1000i+j , with offset o= 0 for training, 104 for validation, and 2×10 4 for test, so
the three splits never share random draws. The randomizations are coordinate permutations, reflections,
per-coordinate powers in [0.75,1.25] , an invertible triangular cross-coordinate coupling with strengths
in [−1.5,1.5] , and up to two appended irrelevant coordinates (observed dimension capped at eight). No
observation noise is added. Training and test targets are the clean objective values, standardized by the
training sample. The GP fit then chooses a diagonal noise variance from {10−4,10 −3,10 −2,10 −1} by
training marginal likelihood in Equation (13). That fitted variance is a model parameter. The benchmark
targets themselves stay clean. Table 5 summarizes the split under the meta-evaluation framework of §4.1.
Predictive protocol.Each episode fits on n= 8 + 2d uniformly sampled observations and evaluates 32
held-out test points, and targets are standardized by training statistics. Every kernel is used iny=f(x)+ε ,
where f∼ GP(0, σ 2
f κθ) and ε∼ N(0, σ 2
n). Candidate-specific hyperparameters θ remain frozen, while
the outer amplitude and noise are fit by
(ˆσ2
f ,ˆσ2
n) = arg max
σ2
f ∈Gf , σ 2n∈Gn
logp(y|X, σ 2
f κθ, σ2
n),(13)
with Gf ={0.1,0.3,1,3} and Gn ={10 −4,10 −3,10 −2,10 −1}. The predictive evaluation metric is mean
held-out CRPS in Equation (11). Final kernel selection minimizes this metric on meta-validation episodes.
The combined search-time score is defined separately in Equation (5).
BBO protocol.This optimization evaluation is separate from the predictive protocol above. Each rollout
starts from 4 + 2d uniformly sampled points and takes T= 8 expected improvement (EI) steps. At each
step, we draw 128 fresh candidates uniformly from [0,1] d and choose the one with the largest EI. The
backend refits amplitude and noise by Equation (13). Let f ⋆ be the task maximum and y⋆
t the best value
23

--- Page 24 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 5: Task-family instantiation and split (§4.1, §4.3.1). Meta-training and meta-validation use the
same five families with disjoint seed offsets (0 and 104). Meta-test uses six families never seen during
search, at offset 2×10 4. Each family contributes 10 seeded episodes per split, giving 50 meta-training, 50
meta-validation, and 60 meta-test tasks. Targets are clean function values.
FamilydSplit(s)
Branin 2 train, val
Ackley 2 train, val
Cosine 8 train, val
Hartmann-6 6 train, val
Levy 6 train, val
Bukin 2 test
Drop-Wave 2 test
Griewank 5 test
Hölder Table 2 test
Rosenbrock 6 test
Rastrigin 6 test
observed after stept. We report
rt = max(f ⋆ −y ⋆
t ,0)
max(f ⋆ −y ⋆
0,10 −8) ,RegretAUC = 1
T
TX
t=1
rt,(14)
where lower is better. Search-time rollouts instead use three EI steps and 64 fresh candidates per step.
Their regret AUC and final regret contribute to the combined meta-training score in Equation(5), alongside
held-out predictive CRPS. The final program selection uses validation CRPS alone.
Baselines.Fixed-kernel grids cover lengthscales {0.1,0.25,0.5,1} for RBF, Matérn-3/2, and Matérn-5/2,
with periodic, rational-quadratic, ARD, linear, and spectral-mixture variants alongside. The winner of each
family by meta-training fitness enters the frozen comparison (Table 6). Input warping (Snoek et al., 2014),
a grid spectral mixture (Suwandi et al., 2025a), and random Fourier features (Rahimi and Recht, 2007) are
fit by marginal likelihood and archived as Tier 2 constructions under the same acceptance checks.
LLM ensemble and bandit.The ensemble uses three LLM backbones, GLM-5.2, DeepSeek-V4-Pro,
and Qwen-3.8 Max. Each backbone runs inside the same tool-calling agent harness (Appendix H.1). The
CAKE baseline of §4.2 uses Qwen-3.8 Max. The ensemble beats its Qwen member used alone (Qwen-only
test CRPS 0.616 against the ensemble mean 0.593, Appendix B.4), while a single frontier model beats
the ensemble (Appendix B.6). A Thompson-sampling bandit selects one model per discovery run, and it
keeps that choice for every round inside the run. Let st be a run’s best selection score in Equation(5). The
running min-max normalized reward is
˜st = st −min t′≤t st′
maxt′≤t st′ −min t′≤t st′
∈[0,1](15)
We set ˜st = 1
2 when the denominator is zero. For arm i, let Wi be the most recent 20 runs on that model.
The Beta counts are
αi =α 0 +
X
t∈Wi
˜st, β i =β 0 +
X
t∈Wi
(1−˜st),(16)
with uniform priors α0 =β 0 = 1. The bandit draws ϑi ∼Beta(α i, βi) for every arm and selects the arm
with the largest draw for the next run. A round-robin warmup continues until every arm has completed at
least 2 runs, and Thompson sampling starts after that.
Search configuration and budget.Proposals come from the three-model ensemble, selected by the
bandit above. Twelve discovery runs (each capped at ten rounds and one hundred tool calls) produced ten
Tier 2 verified pullback programs, consuming 482 backend parameter-tuning trials of up to 64 per program,
while the other two runs terminated without a verified submission. Every accepted program passed Tier 2
verification before submission, no evaluation failed on any task, and all ten appear in the full comparison
24

--- Page 25 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 6: Frozen-benchmark candidates and learned-feature references, with validation and test CRPS and
regret AUC. Lower is better. Bold marks the best value within each block.
CRPS↓AUC↓
Candidate val test val test
Linear 0.783 0.791 0.913 0.872
Periodic (ℓ=1,p=2)0.5490.618 0.8160.678
Rational quadratic (RQ;ℓ=0.25,α=1) 0.559 0.6180.7850.706
Matérn-5/2 (ℓ=0.5) 0.5510.6120.797 0.693
RBF (ℓ=0.25) 0.565 0.641 0.823 0.756
ARD Matérn-5/2 0.567 0.626 0.830 0.752
ARD Matérn-3/2 0.569 0.624 0.817 0.713
Spectral mixture 0.629 0.709 0.869 0.784
Grid spectral mixture (GSM) 0.641–0.787 0.674–0.853 0.837–0.963 0.835–0.928
Input warping 0.566–0.585 0.616–0.645 0.796–0.847 0.695–0.759
Random Fourier features 0.582–0.597 0.636–0.661 0.811–0.875 0.669–0.762
CAKE (best of 50) 0.554 0.609 0.803 0.708
Dual warp–fold (DWF)0.540 0.601 0.789 0.671
Simple spectral warp 0.553 0.618 0.810 0.694
Warp multiscale bump 0.581 0.636 0.840 0.803
Warp index-bump dual-freq (rev.) 0.584 0.634 0.816 0.728
Dual spectral warp interaction 0.598 0.644 0.799 0.752
Warp local-bump phase 0.600 0.646 0.817 0.759
Warp triangular phase-spread 0.615 0.654 0.824 0.738
Warp index-bump dual-freq 0.622 0.653 0.831 0.778
Warp spectral interaction 0.633 0.662 0.815 0.817
Warp spectral fold 0.647 0.676 0.958 0.936
in Table 6. A predictive evaluation costs about one second per candidate, and a search-time rollout suite
about three seconds. Table 11 in Appendix D.1 reports the agent-loop wall-clock, tool-call, and token cost
per discovery run.
B.2 Full Frozen-Benchmark Results
Table 6 lists validation and test values alongside Figure 3.
Table 6 lists all evaluated candidates and learned-feature references, grouped by method family. Figure 3
summarizes their test performance. Its bars show paired 95% bootstrap intervals for differences from DWF,
rather than intervals for each method’s absolute mean. Table 8 provides the paired tests.
The discovered candidates have test CRPS values from0.601 to 0.676, so discovery does not guarantee
that every accepted program transfers well. Validation selects one program before testing. In this campaign,
it selects DWF, which also has the lowest test CRPS among the discoveries.
B.3 Meta-Learned Deep-Kernel Surrogates
Our BBO protocol meta-trains on some function families and tests on others, which is also the setting of
meta-learned GP surrogates. We therefore compare against FSBO (Wistuba and Grabocka, 2021), which
meta-learns a deep kernel across related tasks and fine-tunes it on each new task. Where KERNAUTreturns
a short program, FSBO returns a neural feature map, so the comparison asks how much meta-training data
a learned network needs to match a discovered kernel.
Protocol.We use the official FSBO implementation 4 without modification. It feeds a four-layer, 32-unit
ReLU network into a Matérn-5/2 GP, meta-trains by marginal likelihood with Adam at learning rate 10−4
and batch size 64, and keeps the checkpoint with the best meta-validation loss. Three adaptations connect
it to our benchmark. Inputs are zero-padded to eight coordinates, the benchmark maximum, because
the network has a fixed input size. Meta-training tasks are meta-training episodes, meta-validation tasks
4https://github.com/machinelearningnuremberg/FSBO, the code released with Pineda-Arango et al. (2021).
25

--- Page 26 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
103 104 105
FSBO meta-training points
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
Test CRPS
Mat´ ern-5/2
DWF
124× more data
lower is better
FSBO, native (ﬁne-tuned)
FSBO, frozen
103 104 105
FSBO meta-training points
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
Regret AUCMat´ ern-5/2
DWF
124× more data
lower is better
Figure 8:FSBO needs about two orders of magnitude more meta-training data to match DWF.Test
CRPS (left) and regret AUC (right) on the 60 BBO test tasks, lower is better. FSBO is meta-trained on the
518 points that search scored (matched budget) or on 64,000 points (rich budget). Solid lines show native
FSBO, which is fine-tuned on every episode. Dotted lines show frozen FSBO, which refits only amplitude
and noise. DWF (blue) is archived with 518 points, and the dashed line is fixed Matérn-5/2. Lines join the
two measured FSBO budgets and do not interpolate.
are meta-validation episodes, and the six test families stay unseen. Finally, two data budgets bracket the
comparison. Thematchedbudget uses exactly the ten meta-training episodes that search scored, 518 points
in total. Because these tasks hold only 44 to 56 points each, the batch is capped at 22 so that validation
support and query sets stay disjoint. Therichbudget gives FSBO its natural regime of 250 episodes with
256 points each, 64,000 points in total, at the official batch size. Its checkpoint-selection tasks draw 256
points from each meta-validation episode, as the official validation loop requires more points than the
batch. We train five seeds per budget and select one by meta-validation CRPS before testing.
We evaluate each selected model in two modes. Thefrozenmode fixes the learned feature map and
lengthscale and refits only amplitude and noise on the benchmark grid, the protocol that every discovered
kernel follows. Thenativemode follows FSBO’s own test procedure. It fine-tunes the network from the
meta-trained checkpoint for up to 100 epochs on the observed points before every prediction and every BO
step, and it chooses queries by EI over the same candidate pools. Episodes and pools reuse the benchmark’s
seeded generators.
With the same data, DWF is clearly stronger.Meta-trained on the episodes that search used, FSBO
trails DWF in both modes and on both metrics (Figure 8, two-sided paired Wilcoxon p≤0.005 for all
four contrasts). Frozen FSBO is worse than every fixed kernel except the linear one. Fine-tuning on each
episode helps, but it does not close the gap (CRPS 0.6615 against 0.6011, regret AUC 0.7807 against
0.6712).
With 124 times more data, FSBO reaches parity.Under the rich budget, FSBO in native mode
reaches test CRPS 0.6208 and regret AUC 0.6566. Neither differs significantly from DWF ( p= 0.53
and p= 0.25 ), and the frozen model is likewise not separated (p= 0.18 and p= 0.93 ). A meta-learned
network thus needs about two orders of magnitude more meta-training data to match a single discovered
program, and it does not surpass it. The frozen comparison also shows where the difference arises. Rich
FSBO fits the training families about as well as DWF (validation CRPS0.538 against 0.540), but it transfers
less well to the held-out families ( 0.632 against 0.601). A run at batch size 22, which we used before
adopting the official setting, gave weaker FSBO results (native CRPS0.6439, regret AUC 0.6742), so the
table reports the stronger configuration.
B.4 Repeated Discovery and Search-Budget Controls
We report seven ensemble campaigns, comprising the initial search and six additional searches, alongside a
separate Qwen-only campaign. Figure 9 includes every completed ensemble campaign under this protocol.
In each archive, the reported kernel minimizes validation CRPS among discovered candidates. The six
additional campaigns freeze their selected candidate identifiers before test evaluation. Evaluation uses the
26

--- Page 27 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
0.54 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62
Test CRPS (lower is better)
Ensemble
(7 campaigns)
GPT-6 Astra
(7 campaigns)
Mat´ ern-5/2
0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68 0.70 0.72 0.74
Test regret AUC (lower is better)
Mat´ ern-5/2
Figure 9:Seven ensemble and seven frontier campaigns on the 60 BBO test tasks.The frontier
campaigns use GPT-6 Astra. Each dot is one campaign’s validation-selected kernel, bars mark the mean
per proposer, and the dashed line is fixed Matérn-5/2 (ℓ=0.5, test CRPS 0.6117, regret AUC 0.6931). The
black diamond is one Qwen-only campaign (test CRPS 0.616, regret AUC 0.709). Lower is better for both
metrics. Campaigns that beat Matérn: frontier 7 of 7 on CRPS and 6 of 7 on regret AUC, ensemble 6 of 7
on CRPS and 4 of 7 on regret AUC.
same 50 validation and 60 test tasks, with eight BO steps per task. All selected kernels complete these
evaluations without failures.
Across the seven ensemble campaigns (Figure 9), test CRPS is 0.5930±0.0153 (mean ± sample standard
deviation, SD), compared with 0.6117 for the common fixed Matérn-5/2 reference. Six of seven campaigns
improve on this reference, with a mean reduction of3.05%and a range from−0.30%to6.77%.
Regret AUC is0.6869±0.0444 across campaigns, compared with0.6931 for the fixed Matérn-5/2 reference.
Four of seven campaigns improve on it, and the second ensemble achieves the lowest AUC (0.6097). These
outcomes show consistent predictive gains alongside campaign-dependent optimization performance.
Dispersion is computed across seven complete campaigns evaluated on shared tasks. Search budgets are
those recorded for each campaign. The Qwen-only campaign supplies a same-proposer comparison with
the reported CAKE entry under its recorded training objective and aggregate search budget.
Search-budget-matched CAKE control.CAKE (Suwandi et al., 2025b) uses LLM-guided crossover
and mutation to search compositions of library kernels. It searches a kernel expression rather than an
unrestricted component program. The reported campaign made 101 total LLM calls across its twelve
runs. We gave CAKE the same total budget, one evolutionary search of 60 steps (≈102 LLM calls under
CAKE’s own crossover-and-mutation-per-step schedule). Each candidate kernel expression is scored by its
mean Bayesian information criterion (BIC) when fitted independently to each of the five training families,
so the search must find one structure that generalizes across the training distribution, as KERNAUT’s own
fitness requires. Under this call-budget control, CAKE reaches 0.616 test CRPS and 0.855 test regret AUC.
These values are worse than DWF on both metrics, and the CRPS matches the same-proposer Qwen-only
control’s0.616. The call budgets are approximately matched, while CAKE retains its BIC objective and
proposal procedure.
B.5 Search-Ablation: Archive Sharing and Open-Ended Synthesis
We compare the full method with independent proposals and a restricted construction grammar. All arms
use the same proposer ensemble, per-campaign iteration budget, evidence ladder, and BBO evaluation
protocol. The independent-proposal arm changes feedback, cross-iteration novelty screening, and candidate
retention together, so it tests their combined contribution. The closure arm tests the effect of restricting the
construction space while retaining archive search.
• Full archive.This arm retains the archive and construction interfaces used in the main method, but
this ablation harness optimizes predictive CRPS alone. A shared MAP-Elites archive persists across
iterations within a campaign, so each proposal round sees prior discoveries, and the novelty gate of §3.4
screens against the growing archive.
• Independent proposals.The four construction contracts and the evidence ladder stay the same, but each
iteration proposes on its own, with no shared archive and no cross-iteration novelty gate. Only the final
round’s best candidate per campaign is kept.
27

--- Page 28 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 7: Search-ablation results on the BBO domain. The first three rows are 12 seeded campaigns per
arm, reported as mean ± sample SD. CKS is one deterministic greedy search. Failed calls are model or
tool calls that did not yield an accepted response, summed over each arm’s 12 campaigns.
Search Test CRPS Mean AUC Failed calls
Full archive0.571±0.0310.681 28
Independent proposals0.617±0.0370.695 15
Closure grammar0.618±0.0210.706 22
CKS greedy grammar, depth≤3 0.6250.684 –
• Closure grammar.The shared-archive search loop stays the same, but the agent may use only the
closure contract (§3.1), which matches the compositional-grammar baselines of §2.
Each arm runs 12 seeded campaigns under the same frozen evaluation protocol as §4.3.1, and we score the
validation-selected candidate from each campaign once on the shared meta-test tasks.
The full archive configuration improves test CRPS over both campaign ablations (Table 7). Against
independent proposals, 11 of 12 campaigns favor the full method, with mean difference ∆ =−0.046 .
Against closure grammar, 11 of 12 again favor the full method, with ∆ =−0.047 . Each exact sign-flip
test gives p= 0.006 , or p= 0.013 after Holm correction across the two contrasts. For the CKS check, we
fit squared-exponential (SE), periodic, linear, and rational-quadratic leaves by marginal likelihood, greedily
add, multiply, or replace one leaf up to depth three, and select the frozen structure by validation CRPS.
The selected rational-quadratic kernel reaches0.625test CRPS and0.684regret AUC.
The full-archive mean of 0.571 averages 12 validation-selected kernels. It differs from the original frozen
DWF result of 0.601 in Table 6 and the seven-campaign mean of 0.593 in §4.3.1. These summaries
describe different sets of discovery campaigns. This harness also optimizes predictive CRPS alone, while
the reported campaigns optimize the combined score of Equation (5), which also rewards regret AUC.
B.6 A Frontier Proposer: GPT-6 Astra
We test whether a stronger coding model yields stronger kernels. We replace the ensemble proposer with a
single frontier model, GPT-6 Astra, and keep everything else fixed: the task context, the number of runs
and their round and tool-call limits, the construction contracts, the acceptance checks, the tuning budget,
validation selection, and the frozen evaluation. We ran seven BBO campaigns and report all of them. Each
spends 100–112 LLM calls, against 101 for the first ensemble campaign. We also ran three campaigns
each on ChemBench and forecasting, and two on GlucoseBench.
Prediction and optimization.Figure 9 shows lower test CRPS for all seven frontier campaigns than
for fixed Matérn. The campaign-level CRPS difference between the frontier and ensemble proposers is
supported by an exact two-sided permutation test (p= 0.003 ). Regret AUC improves less consistently,
and its campaign-level difference is not statistically separated (p= 0.22).
Progress across discovery runs.Figure 10 shows how the best validation CRPS falls as runs accumulate.
The frontier proposer’s archive is at the level of the best tuned baseline after its first run, while the ensemble
needs about eight. The ensemble’s mean flattens after that, and the frontier’s keeps falling through the last
run.
The same validation-CRPS leader does not produce a matching regret curve (Figure 11). At each run
we keep the program with the best validation CRPS so far, carry that choice forward when a run accepts
nothing, and plot its validation regret AUC. The campaign is the unit. Mean regret falls for both proposers,
while individual campaigns still move in both directions.
Other domains.In ChemBench, validation selects frontier campaign F2, whose kernel reaches 0.312
test CRPS, 44% below the ensemble selection and significantly better than all six learned references
(Appendix E.1). Two of the three frontier ChemBench campaigns submitted programs in only four of their
eight runs. In the other runs, GPT-6 Astra proposed programs with more than twelve tunable parameters,
which the tuner rejects (Appendix A.3), and ran out of rounds. This rule applies to every proposer. In
GlucoseBench, both frontier campaigns beat the strongest tuned reference by 22%, against 15% for the
28

--- Page 29 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Discovery run
0.50
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.60
0.62
0.64
Best validation CRPS so far
Ensemble, mean of 7
F rontier (GPT-6 Astra), mean of 7
Best tuned baseline
Figure 10:A stronger proposer starts ahead and keeps improving.Best validation CRPS among the
programs accepted after each discovery run (lower is better). Thin lines are the 14 individual campaigns.
Thick lines are the means over the seven ensemble and seven frontier (GPT-6 Astra) campaigns. The
dashed line is the best tuned baseline. A run that accepts no program leaves its curve unchanged.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Discovery run
0.725
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
0.850
0.875
Validation regret AUC of CRPS leader
Ensemble, mean of 7
F rontier (GPT-6 Astra), mean of 7
Figure 11:Validation regret of the validation-CRPS leader.At each discovery run, the plotted value is
the validation regret AUC of the program with the best validation CRPS among those accepted so far. Thin
lines are the 14 campaigns. Thick lines are means over seven ensemble and seven frontier campaigns. The
score is validation regret.
best ensemble campaign (Appendix E.2). Forecasting is the exception. The three frontier selections score
0.191–0.198 three-record CRPS, about the same as fixed RBF (0.205) and far from the ensemble’s selection
(0.091). Here validation barely separates kernels, since all three frontier selections lie within 0.080–0.086
validation CRPS, close to RBF, so a better proposer has little signal to exploit.
B.7 Broad Benchmark Outside the Search Families
We compare DWF with Matérn-5/2 on tasks that were not used in discovery, validation, or the original test.
We assembled a suite of 44 analytic test functions in one to eight dimensions, using definitions from the
SFU Virtual Library of Simulation Experiments.5 The benchmark script provided with the submission code
specifies each implementation, domain, and optimum. For each function we evaluate two domain regimes:
the standard domain and an off-center subdomain that retains the global optimum away from its midpoint.
Each of the 88 function–regime combinations has ten seeded episodes, with a new off-center subdomain
drawn for each episode. Predictive episodes use n= 8 + 2d training points and 32 held-out points. BO
episodes use 4 + 2d initial points and T= 8 EI steps with 128 fresh candidates per step, matching the
main protocol. We compare the archived kernels with grid-fitted amplitude and noise, and a second pair
that refits isotropic lengthscale, amplitude, and noise by marginal likelihood.
5https://www.sfu.ca/~ssurjano/optimization.html
29

--- Page 30 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Function instances, sorted
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
CRPS change vs Mat´ ern-5/2 (%)
(a) Synthetic, frozen (44/88 better)
Symmetry index S and variant
S ≥ 0.9
0.5 ≤ S < 0.9
S < 0.5
full domain
oﬀ-center
Function instances, sorted
8 below −50% (min −369%)
(b) Synthetic, reﬁt (57/88 better)
Dataset × n, sorted
(c) Real regression
DWF better on
frozen (4/16)
reﬁt (11/16)
Figure 12:DWF outside the search families.CRPS change relative to Matérn-5/2, where positive values
favor DWF. Each synthetic point averages ten episodes for one function and domain variant. Color gives
the empirical reflection-symmetry index S, defined in the paragraph below. Circles use the standard
domain, and triangles use an off-center subdomain. The refit panel clips eight losses below −50%, with a
minimum of−369%. Real-regression points average 20 splits for one dataset and training size.
We also use eight real regression datasets with dimensions five to thirteen: diabetes and California housing
from scikit-learn,6 and yacht, airfoil, concrete, energy, machine CPU, and Boston from OpenML.7 The
OpenML dataset IDs are 42370, 43919, 4353, 43918, 230, and 531, respectively. The energy target is
Y1. The benchmark script removes rows with nonfinite values and constant input columns, then min-max
scales inputs over each full dataset. Each dataset uses 20 random splits at n= 25 and n= 100 training
points, with 100 held-out points. These comparisons test predictive CRPS only.
Figure 12 summarizes the comparison. For task values f(u) on u∈[0,1] d, we estimate S= 1−
1
d
Pd
j=1 E[(f(u)−f(r j(u)))2]/(2 Var(f(u))), where rj reflects coordinate j about 1/2. We use 4096
fixed-seed uniform points per task. Frozen DWF wins 44 of 88 synthetic function instances, with median
relative CRPS change −0.2% and paired Wilcoxon p= 0.77 . Its regret AUC is better on 52 instances,
with a median gain of 2.7% and p= 0.004 . Refitting raises the predictive win count to 57 and the median
gain to 0.6% (p= 0.025 ), but eight large losses make the mean change −11.9%. Refit regret AUC is not
separated from Matérn (p= 0.70).
The effect follows the geometry diagnosed above. Among the 20 instances with empirical symmetry index
S≥0.9 , frozen DWF wins 16, with median CRPS gain5.6% (p= 0.0002 ). Across all 88 instances, S and
the frozen CRPS gain have Spearman correlation ρ= 0.37 (p= 0.0004 ). On the 44 off-center variants,
frozen DWF wins only 15 and has median change−3.3%(p= 0.016).
The real-data check is less favorable. With the archived geometry, DWF wins 4 of 16 dataset-by-sample-
size comparisons and has median change −4.2% (p= 0.011 ). Per-dataset refitting raises this to 11 of 16
and a median gain of1.3%, but the aggregate difference is not significant (p= 0.12 ). The broad benchmark
therefore supports DWF as a readable prior for approximate central reflection.
C Analysis of the DWF Kernel
This appendix collects the analysis of DWF, the kernel discussed in §4.3.1. We first give its discovery
record, frozen geometry, and source code. We then state the regularity and soft symmetry it induces. The
last part reports the matched controls and the sharpness and symmetry tests. Appendix B.7 then compares
DWF on tasks outside the search families, where it helped when the tasks had approximate reflection
symmetry.
6https://scikit-learn.org/stable/datasets/
7https://www.openml.org/
30

--- Page 31 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 8: Paired Wilcoxon tests of DWF’s per-task CRPS against each competitor (n=50 validation, n=60
test). “Wins” counts tasks where DWF is lower. Med. ∆CRPS is the median signed difference, and
negative favors DWF. The p-values are unadjusted. Holm correction over the five competitors within each
split leaves every 0.05-level conclusion unchanged. ∗p <0.05, ∗∗p <0.01, ∗∗∗p <0.001.
Validation (n=50) Test (n=60)
Competitor wins med.∆CRPSpwins med.∆CRPSp
vs. fixed baselines
Periodic (ℓ=1,p=2) 34/50−0.009 0.013* 45/60−0.018 7.0×10 −5***
Matérn-5/2 (ℓ=0.5) 31/50−0.015 0.06939/60−0.013 0.023*
RQ (ℓ=0.25,α=1) 39/50−0.018 3.5×10 −5*** 45/60−0.019 2.2×10 −5***
vs. discovered kernels
Simple spectral warp 37/50−0.011 7.0×10 −4*** 46/60−0.019 3.6×10 −6***
Warp multiscale bump 41/50−0.037 1.6×10 −8*** 43/60−0.031 9.3×10 −5***
C.1 Paired Predictive Comparisons
Table 8 reports paired CRPS differences on the same 50 validation and 60 test tasks. Negative differences
favor DWF. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test assumes symmetric differences for a location-shift interpretation.
Holm correction over the five competitors within each split leaves every conclusion at the 0.05 level
unchanged. These task-level tests complement the paired intervals and familywise results rather than
measuring variation across independent discovery campaigns.
C.2 Discovery Record and Frozen Geometry
The DWF source passed Tier 2 on the first verification, and submission re-checked the same source at the
selected parameters before evaluation. Appendix C.4 gives the submitted transform, and Appendix B.4
records that replaying it reproduces the reported episode scores.
The kernel is the pullback kT (x, x′) =k 5/2
ℓ (T(x), T(x ′)), where k5/2
ℓ is a Matérn-5/2 kernel with
lengthscale ℓ= 0.5 . For each input coordinate, the transform concatenates a monotone warp and a
triangular fold:
wλ(u) = 1−e −λu
1−e −λ , a ν(u) = 1
π arcsin

sin(πνu)

,(17)
T(x) =

wλ(xj),sin(ζ)a ν(xj)
d
j=1.
The warp remains close to the original coordinate. The fold maps approximate reflections to similar values,
while the warp prevents them from becoming identical. Figure 14 shows prior functions generated by this
geometry.
Frozen geometry.Figure 13 plots the frozen maps. On [0,1] the warp differs from the identity by at
most 0.027. The fold spans less than one cycle, peaks at u= 0.513 , and identifies u with 1/ν−u . That
reflection is centered at 0.513, near the middle of the unit interval. At the selected frequency, repeated
feature values arise from this single reflection. The right panel shows what the joint covariance does with
that fold. For the anchor u= 0.2 , whose fold-mirror is u= 0.825 , joint DWF agrees with Matérn-5/2
at the mirror, because the warp block still separates the two inputs. Along the rest of the slice the two
curves differ by as much as 0.21, so the fold does change local shape. The additive split, with equal
branch weights, keeps covariance near 0.70 at the same mirror pair, while the fold-only branch would
assign covariance 1 there. The additive form assigns a separate covariance component to the repeated fold
coordinate, as quantified in Proposition 5.
C.3 How DWF Was Proposed
The agent registered its formulation in its first turn and staged the program with starting valuesλ= 2.0 ,
ν= 1.5 , ζ=π/2 , and base lengthscale 0.5. The backend scored these together with 63 Halton points, and
the agent submitted the top trial (λ= 0.215 , ν= 0.975 , ζ= 1.433 ). The base lengthscale remained fixed
31

--- Page 32 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Coordinate u
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Transformed value
Identity
Warp
Fold
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Coordinate u
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Covariance with 0 .2
Mat´ ern-5/2
Joint DWF
Additive split
Figure 13: Frozen DWF geometry, where u is a coordinate in [0,1] . Left: the warp stays near the identity,
and the fold is one tent peaking at u= 0.513 (dotted line). Right: covariance with a reference point at
u= 0.2 and the dotted line at its fold mirror u= 0.825 . Joint DWF matches Matérn-5/2 at the mirror,
while the additive split stays near0.70.
at ℓ= 0.5 throughout tuning because the declared tuning field did not control the base kernel. All reported
DWF evaluations therefore use this fixed lengthscale. The agent writes κ for the fold frequency that the
main text callsν.
The shared system prompt, domain task descriptions, and assignment are reproduced in Appendix H.
C.4 Reference Implementation
The listing below is the Python code that the agent wrote for DWF under the pullback contract (§3.1).
transform_point(pullback contract)
1deftransform_point(x, parameters):
2x = np.asarray(x, dtype=float).ravel()
3d = x.shape[0]
4warp_rate =float(parameters["warp_rate"])
5fold_frequency =float(
6parameters["fold_frequency"])
7fold_phase =float(parameters["fold_phase"])
8
9ifabs(warp_rate) < 1e−10:
10warp = x.copy()
11else:
12warp = (1.0−np.exp(−warp_rate∗x)) / (
131.0−np.exp(−warp_rate))
14
15fold = (1.0 / np.pi)∗np.arcsin(
16np.sin(np.pi∗fold_frequency∗x)
17)∗np.sin(fold_phase)
18
19result = np.concatenate([warp, fold])
20returnresult
Under the pullback contract the agent supplies only this pointwise transform, and it never builds a Gram
matrix. The trusted interpreter evaluates transform_point on each input, obtains the 2d-dimensional
feature vector, and applies the certified Matérn-5/2 base kernel to pairs of those vectors to assemble K.
Because the agent’s code never sees pairs of points and never assembles the matrix, the program stays
inside the contract of §3.1 and inherits the pullback validity guarantee.
32

--- Page 33 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
u
−2
0
2
prior sample f(u)
u↔1/ν−u
c = 0.513
(a) Mat´ ern-5/2, ℓ= 0.5
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
u
u↔1/ν−u
(b) Discovered DWF (joint)
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
u
u↔1/ν−u
(c) Additive reﬁnement‡
0.45 0.50 0.55
u (zoom near c)
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
slope f′(u)
(d) Slope jumps at the apex
DWF Mat´ ern
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
u
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
corr [f(u),f (1/ν−u)]
(e) Correlation at fold mirrors
DWF
Mat´ ern
Additive‡
Fold only
0.0 0.5 1.0
x1
0.0
0.5
1.0
x2
(f) DWF sample on [0, 1]2
Figure 14:Prior samples under the discovered kernel.Four draws from unit-variance GPs on [0,1] .
Panels (a)–(c) share the same standard normals, so the draws differ only through the kernel: (a) Matérn-5/2
with ℓ= 0.5 , (b) joint DWF at its frozen parameters, (c) the refinementkadd = 1
2 kw + 1
2 ka. The dotted line
marks the fold peak c= 1/(2ν) = 0.513 , and arrows join the mirror pair u= 0.2 and 1/ν−u= 0.825 .
(d) Finite-difference slopes near c. They jump for DWF (solid) and stay continuous for Matérn (dashed),
apart from small ripples from the 10−8 jitter. (e) Prior correlation between f(u) and f(1/ν−u) . Joint
DWF is within 0.003 of Matérn, the additive kernel stays above0.57, and the fold branch alone fixes it at1.
(f) One DWF draw on [0,1] 2, with contours bending along xj =c . ‡Human researcher-defined refinement,
not search output.
C.5 Prior Samples
Figure 14 shows what the frozen kernel implies before any data are seen.
C.6 Regularity of DWF
A smooth base kernel can induce a nonsmooth GP after a folded input transform. The result below
characterizes that prior regularity. Its empirical relevance is tested separately by the smoothing ablation in
Appendix C.8.1.
Proposition 4(Derivative jump at a fold).In one dimension, let ν >0 , s= sinζ , and let c= 1/(2ν) lie
in the interior of the input interval. Let G be a zero-mean, unit-variance, isotropic Matérn-5/2 GP on R2
with lengthscale ℓ >0 , and set F(u) =G(w λ(u), saν(u)). The one-sided mean-square derivatives exist
and satisfy
[F ′]c :=F ′
+(c)−F ′
−(c) =−2sν ∂ 2G(T(c)),(18)
Var

[F ′]c

= 20s2ν2
3ℓ2 .(19)
Ifs̸= 0, there is no two-sided mean-square derivative atc.
Proof. Locally aν(c+h) = 1/2−ν|h| , so the two tangent vectors are (w′
λ(c), sν) and (w′
λ(c),−sν) .
The mean-square chain rule gives the first identity. The Matérn- 5/2 correlation has expansion k(r) =
33

--- Page 34 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
1−5r 2/(6ℓ2)+o(r 2). Differentiating the covariance in its two arguments givesVar(∂2G) = 5/(3ℓ2) (Ras-
mussen and Williams, 2006, Section 4.1.1). Multiplication by (2sν)2 proves the variance formula. A
positive variance of the difference prevents the two derivative limits from agreeing in mean square.
The claim concerns the prior’s one-sided mean-square derivatives. It does not require every posterior mean
or covariance section to display a kink. For GP amplitude σ2
f , multiply the variance by σ2
f . In multiple
dimensions, the same argument applies along a coordinate crossing its fold with the other coordinates
fixed. Smoothness of the outer kernel alone therefore does not characterize the regularity induced by a
nonsmooth transform.
C.7 Additive Kernels and Soft Reflection Symmetry
The additive refinement allocates separate covariance components to the warp and fold. The following
RKHS identities explain how it encourages agreement at fold mirrors without requiring identical predictions
there.
Proposition 5(Additive norm and soft reflection symmetry).Let kw(x, y) =k 0
w(w(x), w(y)) and
ka(x, y) =k 0
a(a(x), a(y))be PSD kernels andk add =αk w + (1−α)k a for0< α <1. Then
∥f∥ 2
Hkadd
= inf
f=f w+fa
(
∥fw∥2
Hkw
α +
∥fa∥2
Hka
1−α
)
.(20)
Defined k(x, y)2 =k(x, x) +k(y, y)−2k(x, y). Ifa(x) =a(y), then
dkadd(x, y) = √α dkw(x, y),(21)
|f(x)−f(y)| ≤ √α∥f∥ Hkadd
dkw(x, y).(22)
On a compact domain, if w is continuous and injective, k0
w is universal on its image, and ka is continuous,
thenk add is universal.
Proof. The RKHS sum construction is the quotient of the direct sum of the two scaled RKHSs, giving the
infimum norm (Aronszajn, 1950; Bach, 2008). Canonical squared distances add with the same weights.
The fold distance is zero on a common fiber, proving the distance identity. The reproducing property and
Cauchy–Schwarz give the function-difference bound. Finally, the warp pullback is universal because the
continuous injection has a continuous inverse on its compact image. Its RKHS is included in the additive
RKHS with norm increased by at mostα −1/2, so density is preserved.
The joint DWF kernel is also universal under the same compactness and base-universality assumptions
because its transform is injective. Thus Proposition 5 compares regularization geometry rather than
claiming an unconditional approximation advantage for addition. Its mirror identity uses the same warp
kernel on both sides. For the joint radial kernel at a fold mirror, the fold distance vanishes and the joint
covariance equals that warp covariance when their lengthscales agree. The additive kernel instead allocates
an explicit covariance component to the shared fold value.
C.8 DWF versus Parametric Input Warping
The original power and exponential warps reach 0.566–0.585 validation CRPS, compared with 0.540
for DWF. However, they use a negative log-likelihood (NLL) fitting objective. We therefore retune the
constructions on a common predictive objective to compare their structure more directly. Table 9 reports
the results.
Component ablation.Both branches contribute to prediction. The validation-selected joint kernel
reaches 0.6011 test CRPS, compared with 0.6223 for the warp alone and 0.6147 for the fold alone. Adding
the two branch kernels improves CRPS further to 0.5668. We evaluate this human researcher-defined
refinement separately from the frozen search output, using the matched protocol below.
34

--- Page 35 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 9: Matched predictive-objective controls (tuning protocol described above). Test CRPS mean ± SD
is over five tuning repeats on the same 60 episodes, not over five discovery campaigns. Selected columns
report the validation-chosen repeat. Archived DWF is a frozen anchor with a different historical search
budget. ‡Human researcher-defined refinement, not search output.
Construction Test CRPS (repeat mean±SD) Selected val. Selected test Selected AUC
Identity Matérn0.6198±0.00100.5546 0.6189 0.6824
Warp only0.6245±0.00280.5590 0.6223 0.6896
Fold only0.6339±0.02830.5519 0.6147 0.6901
Additive branches‡ 0.5668±0.00000.5020 0.5668 0.6190
Joint branches0.6131±0.00710.5404 0.6011 0.6712
Rational quadratic0.6123±0.00490.5489 0.6090 0.6896
Optimized ARD0.6511±0.01560.5730 0.6381 0.7612
Archived DWF0.60110.5404 0.6011 0.6712
Matched tuning and frozen selection.We give each of seven arms 64 configurations for each of five
scrambled-Halton seeds (101–105). All arms use the same ten training episodes, with two per family,
the same GP amplitude/noise grids, and the same predictive CRPS objective. We check a 600-second
limit between configurations, but every run completes all 64 trials before the cap. Each arm starts with an
identity-oriented configuration and the archived DWF geometry.
Within each repeat, we retain the configuration with the lowest training CRPS. We then use 50 validation
episodes to choose one repeat per arm and record the selected IDs before evaluating the common 60 test
episodes and eight-step BO rollouts. This protocol tests refinements of the existing discovery.
Result and interpretation.The selected additive kernel improves both reported means: test CRPS falls
from 0.6011 to 0.5668 (5.7%), and regret AUC from 0.6712 to 0.6190 (7.8%). The regret reduction is
descriptive because its multiplicity-adjusted test does not cross the 0.05 threshold, as reported below. The
refinement improves CRPS on four of six family means, with losses on Bukin and Drop-Wave. Every arm
completes all test episodes.
We quantify the paired CRPS gain by resampling episodes within each held-out family 5,000 times.
The additive-minus-joint difference is −0.0343, with a 95% bootstrap interval [−0.0468,−0.0211] . A
two-sided paired Wilcoxon test gives Holm-adjusted p= 0.00028 across the six non-anchor comparisons
against joint DWF. These comparisons describe differences within the evaluated benchmark families.
All five additive repeats select the same shared initial geometry, with equal mixture weights and branch
lengthscales 0.5. This explains their zero SD across repeats. Joint DWF still improves on either separately
retuned branch, but the additive construction performs best under this protocol.
C.8.1 Sharpness Ablation
Local smoothing on the BBO benchmark.We smooth the fold to test whether its sharp cusp is necessary
for the additive gain. We compare sharp and smoothed versions of both joint and additive constructions,
together with identity, warp-only, and fold-only controls. Each arm receives the same 64 configurations for
each of five tuner seeds, including the archived geometry, with no runtime cutoff. We select one repeat per
arm on the same 50 validation episodes, then evaluate it on 60 test episodes and eight-step BO rollouts.
These ablations reuse the benchmark families and do not constitute new discovery campaigns.
For a raw fold value a∈[−1/2,1/2] , put t= 1/2− |a| . Within t < ϵ , replace t by ϵq(t/ϵ), where
q(r) = 3r 2 −3r 3 +r 4, and retain the original fold elsewhere. With ϵ= 0.02 , this removes the first-
derivative cusp, preserves extrema and reflection fibers, and changes the unscaled feature by at most
27ϵ/256 = 0.002109375 . The composed fold is C 2 at the patch boundaries and extrema. Smoothing
changes local geometry as well as regularity.
Smoothing changes prediction only slightly. Within each construction, the sharp and smooth variants select
the same structural parameters. The joint sharp-minus-smooth CRPS difference is −0.000016, with 95%
interval [−0.000051,0.000024] and adjusted p= 1 . For the additive kernel, the difference is −0.000047,
with interval [−0.000079,−0.000014] and adjusted p= 0.0262 . Although detectable, the additive change
amounts to only0.008%of CRPS. The paired AUC differences are exactly zero.
35

--- Page 36 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 10: BBO sharp/smooth ablation. Entries use validation-selected configurations evaluated on the
same 60 test episodes. Lower is better. ‡Human researcher-defined refinement, not search output.
Construction Test CRPS Regret AUC
Joint 0.601146 0.671159
Joint, smooth 0.601162 0.671159
Additive‡ 0.566832 0.618955
Additive, smooth‡ 0.566879 0.618955
The additive gain persists after smoothing (Table 10). The additive-minus-joint CRPS difference is
−0.03431 (5.7%), with interval [−0.04650,−0.02110] and adjusted p= 0.00030 . The AUC difference
is −0.05220, with interval [−0.09681,−0.01035] and adjusted p= 0.0742 , so we treat the AUC gain as
descriptive. A sharp cusp is therefore unnecessary for the observed CRPS gain, even though Proposition 4
identifies a derivative jump in the original prior.
For this follow-up, we use 20,000 paired bootstrap resamples within each family, weight family means
equally, and apply approximate centered-bootstrap two-sided tests of the mean difference. Holm correction
covers the three contrasts and two metrics together. We report unadjusted intervals. These bootstrap tests
differ from the earlier Wilcoxon comparisons.
D Time-Series Forecasting
This appendix supports §4.3.2. It specifies the forecasting protocol, reports the full frozen results, and adds
the two held-out records, a long-horizon diagnostic, and the AutoGP comparison.
D.1 Protocol
This section specifies the forecasting benchmark used in §4.3.2, from the greenhouse-gas records and
episode construction through the baseline grid and the cost of the agent loop.
Records and episodes.The benchmark bundles monthly global means of four greenhouse gases from the
NOAA Global Monitoring Laboratory8 (CO2 with 569 months from 1979, CH4 with 514 from 1983, N2O
with 304 from 2001, and SF6 with 346 from 1997), with missing months removed. The two further held-out
records, CFC-12 and CFC-11, come from the NOAA HATS program and are described in Appendix D.3.
Inputs are the month index scaled to[0,1]over the full record.
For episode i, draw Wi uniformly from {216, . . . , Trec −48} , where Trec is the record length. After
optionally reversing the full record, use observations 1:Wi for training and Wi + 1:Wi + 48 for evaluation.
The remaining observations are unused in that episode. Add Gaussian noise only to the training targets,
with standard deviation drawn uniformly between zero and 4% of the clean training-window standard
deviation. Standardize both splits using clean training-window statistics.
Seeds are offset by split: meta-train uses seeds 0–8999, meta-validation 10000–18999 on the same three
gases, and the held-out records use 20000 and above, with SF 6 from 20000, CFC-12 from 21000, and
CFC-11 from 22000. These seed ranges distinguish generated episodes. Underlying observations and
target windows can overlap across episodes.
Fitting and fitness.Predictive evaluation fits only an outer covariance amplitude over (0.1,0.3,1,3) and
diagonal noise over(10−4,10 −3,10 −2,10 −1) by training-window marginal likelihood, using the same grid
as the synthetic benchmark in Equation (13). It then scores held-out CRPS on the standardized 48-month
horizon. Search-time fitness is negative mean held-out CRPS across training episodes. Candidate-specific
parameters are tuned only through the backend’s declared spaces (up to 64 Halton-sequence trials per
program). Program fitness also subtracts a 10−3 log(1 +p) complexity penalty for p exposed parameters.
The penalty is constant across a program’s trials, so it does not affect which setting the backend freezes.
The functional novelty gate of Equation (2) applies with thresholdτ nov = 0.08.
8Monthly greenhouse-gas records, taken from the NOAA Global Monitoring Laboratory, https://gml.noaa.gov/.
36

--- Page 37 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 11: Agent-loop cost per discovery run, min–max over the 12 runs of each reported search.
Per discovery run BBO Time-series
Rounds 1–10 8–10
Tool calls 0–11 7–10
Input tokens 4k–190k 69k–184k
Output tokens 0.3k–10k 3k–9.6k
BBO Time-series0
20
40
60
80
100
Share of tool calls (%)
Formulation
Draft/verify
Parameter search
Submission
Archive query
Final eval.
Figure 15: Share of tool calls by workflow phase, pooled across the 12 runs of each reported search (97
BBO calls, 109 time-series calls). Each phase groups these tools. Formulation: propose_formulation.
Draft/verify: stage_candidate and verify_staged_candidate. Parameter search:
optimize_parameters and evaluate_parameters. Submission: submit_staged_candidate.
Archive query:query_archiveandinspect_candidate. Final evaluation:evaluate_candidate.
Baseline grid.Fixed references use closure trees over normalized time: RBF, Matérn, rational quadratic,
linear, periodic, ARD, and spectral-mixture variants, and the strongest grid point per family is selected
on training fitness only. Selection is separate for each benchmark, so the rational-quadratic winner here
(ℓ=0.5) differs from the BBO selection (ℓ=0.25). Three fitted reference families, namely monotone input
warping, grid spectral mixtures, and tuned random Fourier features (Appendix B.1), join the same frozen
protocol, each archived as one winner per training family.
Search configuration and budget.This search reuses the ensemble configuration of §4.3.1: twelve
discovery runs capped at ten rounds and one hundred tool calls produced nine Tier 2 verified programs (six
spectral, two feature-map, one residual feature map), consuming 498 backend parameter-tuning trials. A
predictive evaluation costs about one second per episode at these window sizes.
Agent-loop cost.Table 11 reports rounds, tool calls, and token usage per discovery run. The mean gap
between consecutive run starts is 2.6 minutes for BBO and 3.1 minutes for time series.
Both bounds in Table 11 trace to specific outcomes. The BBO search’s zero-tool-call minimum is one
discovery run that returned a single long planning turn and never called a tool, exhausting its round
budget immediately. Together with one other run whose optimized parameters failed Tier 2 re-verification
at submission, this accounts for the two BBO runs left without a verified submission above. All three
unsubmitted time-series runs instead spent their full ten-round budget cycling stage_candidate and
verify_staged_candidateagainst the same interface-conformance failure.
Figure 15 groups every tool call from both reported searches by workflow phase. Forecasting runs spent
45.9% of their calls drafting and verifying code, compared with 26.8% for BBO. A spectral program
returns frequencies of shape M×d and raw weights of length M. The trusted interpreter constructs the
covariance from those outputs (Definition 2). The program does not return a symbolic cosine sum or
assemble the Gram matrix. The call shares alone do not identify why forecasting needed more verification
attempts.
37

--- Page 38 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 12: Frozen greenhouse-gas candidates, fitted reference families, and the closed-grammar CAKE
winner: mean CRPS over validation episodes and over ten held-out SF6 windows (lower is better).
Method val SF 6
Linear 0.826 0.959
Periodic (p≈annual) 0.241 1.799
RQ (ℓ=0.5) 0.095 0.067
Matérn-5/2ℓ=10.091 0.050
Matérn-3/2ℓ=10.099 0.075
RBFℓ=0.50.0860.029
ARD-RBF (ℓ= 1) 0.165 0.016
ARD-RBF ramp 0.124 0.109
learned-feature references
Spectral mixture 0.750 1.024
Grid spectral mixture (GSM) 1.155–1.347 1.433–1.626
Input warping 0.121–0.1720.014–0.168
Random Fourier features 0.114–0.204 0.019–0.071
Kernaut discoveries
Harmonic–trend root 0.128 0.018
Dyadic multiband harmonics 0.100 0.024
Poly-modulated chirp 0.126 0.026
Chirp–poly feature map 0.118 0.052
Residual period-bank + poly 0.088 0.059
Power-law trend + Lorentz 0.190 0.208
Matérn-cascade quasiperiodic 0.192 0.211
Gaussian harmonics† 0.219 0.223
Harmonic–trend revision† 1.501 1.704
CAKE best (of 30) 0.082 0.036
D.2 Full Time-Series Benchmark Results
We report all frozen candidates and reference families in Table 12. Ranges show variation across fits to
individual training families. We retain entries marked † under the soft novelty-penalty policy and select
baseline grids on training episodes. Uniform ARD at lengthscale 1 and isotropic RBF at lengthscale 0.5
use the same one-dimensional kernel family with different lengthscales.
Validation and SF6 rank candidates differently. On the original ten-window SF6 evaluation, the validation-
selected kernel has CRPS 0.059, compared with 0.029 for RBF. The 30-window diagnostic in Table 13
instead gives ARD-RBF the lowest overall CRPS, while harmonic–trend root is slightly better on forward
windows. Harmonic–trend root is the strongest discovery on SF 6, but it loses all 60 CFC windows to
the validation-selected kernel and averages 0.334 across the three test records (Appendix D.3). Thus, the
validation-selected kernel’s main benefit is transfer to the two CFC records, rather than the best fit to SF6
alone.
Closed-grammar forecasting search and diagnostics.CAKE searches on thirty training episodes from
the three training gases. Validation selects a program at 0.082 CRPS, ahead of the fixed kernels on that
split. Its original ten-window SF6 score is 0.036, against 0.029 for RBF. The three-record comparison in
Appendix D.3 is the primary transfer result.
Table 13 separates forward and reversed SF6 windows and reports interval coverage and width. Harmonic–
trend root was selected for this diagnostic by its SF 6 test performance. The thirty windows comprise
twenty forward and ten reversed windows, with 197 overlapping target-window pairs among 435 pairs, so
the summaries describe variation within one record.
38

--- Page 39 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 13: Frozen forecasting diagnostics on 30 SF 6 windows (20 forward, 10 reversed). Coverage and
width refer to nominal 95% marginal predictive intervals on forward windows. Targets are clean held-out
values, and variance includes fitted observation noise, matching the benchmark CRPS. Widths are in
training-standardized units. The results are descriptive, from one record with overlapping windows.
Kernel All CRPS Forward CRPS Reversed CRPS
Forward
coverage
Forward
width
Residual period-bank (selected) 0.0456 0.0488 0.0391 0.918 0.334
Harmonic–trend root 0.0194 0.0174 0.0235 0.925 0.121
RBF (ℓ= 0.5) 0.0264 0.0284 0.0223 0.880 0.153
Uniform ARD-RBF (ℓ= 1) 0.0184 0.0178 0.0195 0.916 0.117
Table 14: Mean CRPS ± SEM over 30 held-out windows per record (lower is better). Each unstarred
frozen row is selected on validation data. The overall mean weights the three records equally, and Fwd.
uses forward-time windows only. ∗Best fixed selects a fixed baseline separately for each test record.
Harmonic–trend selects a discovery by SF6 test performance only, then evaluates that same discovery on
both CFC records. †AutoGP infers a new structure for every window and averages eight predictions.
Method SF 6 CFC-12 CFC-11 Mean Fwd.
Fixed (RBF)0.026±0.003 0.268±0.061 0.320±0.055 0.205±0.027 0.098±0.007
Best fixed∗ 0.026±0.003 0.182±0.053 0.134±0.034 0.114±0.021 0.024±0.002
GSM1.473±0.047 0.812±0.173 0.633±0.105 0.973±0.069 0.690±0.017
Input warping0.103±0.010 0.143±0.039 0.129±0.026 0.125±0.016 0.057±0.004
RFF0.052±0.008 0.252±0.067 0.237±0.033 0.181±0.025 0.105±0.012
CAKE0.027±0.003 0.220±0.063 0.189±0.051 0.145±0.0270.022±0.002
CKS grammar, depth≤3 0.063±0.005 0.229±0.061 0.234±0.049 0.175±0.026 0.065±0.004
AutoGP† 0.027±0.005 0.185±0.050 0.148±0.038 0.120±0.021 0.028±0.002
Period-bank + poly0.046±0.0060.121±0.0270.106±0.0220.091±0.012 0.034±0.003
Harmonic–trend∗ 0.019±0.003 0.365±0.082 0.617±0.116 0.334±0.047 0.138±0.013
D.3 Additional Held-Out Forecasting Records
Records and protocol.We add two held-out records after search: the NOAA HATS combined global
monthly means of CFC-12 and CFC-11 9, with 586 and 587 months from 1977. Both rise and then
decline, a shape absent from the three training gases. We chose them for this shape before evaluating
any kernel. Episodes follow the SF6 protocol exactly, with the same 48-month horizon, training-window
standardization, noise injection, and reversal rule. The 30 SF6 windows are the same as in Table 13. The
CFC records use the next seed blocks,21000and22000.
We score 58 frozen kernels: the 19 members of the forecasting archive (nine discoveries and ten training-
selected fixed kernels), all 30 CAKE winners, and the three fitted winners each of input warping, random
Fourier features, and the grid spectral mixture. No kernel is retuned or reselected. Each family’s represen-
tative in Table 14 is its member with the lowest validation CRPS on the original validation episodes. No
evaluation fails.
Results.Table 15 gives the paired comparisons. On both CFC records, the selected discovery ranks
first of 58 by mean CRPS and clearly improves on the validation-selected fixed kernel, random Fourier
features, and the grid spectral mixture. Its lower means against input warping and CAKE are not separated
from zero. On SF6 it loses to the fixed kernel and CAKE. The ranges within families are wide on the new
records. Input warping spans 0.143–0.737 on CFC-12 and 0.111–0.749 on CFC-11, and CAKE spans
0.220–1.831 and 0.189–1.470. Selecting within a family by validation therefore matters for every method,
not only for discovery.
Forward and reversed windows behave differently. Averaged over the forward windows of the three records,
the discovery reaches 0.034, against 0.022 for CAKE and 0.024 for the best fixed kernel per record. Its
overall advantage therefore comes mainly from reversed windows, where its equal-record mean is0.136
against 0.194 for AutoGP, 0.246 for CAKE, and 0.291 for RBF (Figure 16). The three validation-selected
9https://gml.noaa.gov/hats/
39

--- Page 40 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
Equal-record mean CRPS
RBF
CKS depth 3
CAKE
AutoGP
Frontier F3
Frontier F2
Frontier F1
Ensemble period-bank
Forward windows
0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
Equal-record mean CRPS
Reversed windows
Figure 16:The same 90 windows, split by time direction.Each point is the equal-record mean CRPS
(mean within SF6, CFC-12, and CFC-11, then the mean of those three). Forward and reversed windows
are separate summaries inside the 48-month benchmark. The final-120-month diagnostic is a different
protocol and is not included. Frontier F1–F3 are the validation-selected kernels from the three GPT-6 Astra
forecasting campaigns.
Table 15: Paired comparisons of the validation-selected discovery (residual period-bank + poly) against
each validation-selected reference, over 30 windows per record. Entries give windows won by the discovery
and the two-sided Wilcoxonp-value. Pooled combines all 90 windows. Windows overlap within records,
so p-values describe variation within records and not independent replications. Holm correction over the
five references within each column leaves every 0.05-level conclusion unchanged.
Comparator SF 6 CFC-12 CFC-11 Pooled
Fixed (RBF,ℓ=0.5) 7/30 (7.1×10 −5) 26/30 (2.0×10 −6) 25/30 (2.4×10 −5) 58/90 (7.5×10 −6)
Input warping 26/30 (2.6×10 −7) 12/30 (0.98) 15/30 (0.42) 53/90 (8.7×10 −5)
Random Fourier features 14/30 (0.52) 21/30 (0.0066) 27/30 (3.9×10 −7) 62/90 (4.0×10 −7)
Grid spectral mixture 30/30 (1.9×10 −9) 30/30 (1.9×10 −9) 29/30 (8.0×10 −8) 89/90 (2.7×10 −16)
CAKE 2/30 (9.3×10 −9) 16/30 (0.052) 16/30 (0.24) 34/90 (0.92)
Best fixed per record∗ 7/30 (7.1×10 −5) 17/30 (0.20) 14/30 (0.72) –
Harmonic–trend root∗ 4/30 (3.0×10 −5) 30/30 (1.9×10 −9) 30/30 (1.9×10 −9) 64/90 (1.8×10 −8)
frontier kernels score 0.191–0.198 overall and remain behind the ensemble selection in both directions.
These means treat the three records equally. Windows overlap inside each record, so the spread describes
those records. Harmonic–trend root, the best discovered kernel on SF6, loses every window on both CFC
records to the selected discovery.
AutoGP.We also run native AutoGP inference (Saad et al., 2023) independently on each of the same 90
windows, with eight particles, 75 Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) steps, and 10 Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (HMC) steps per rejuvenation. We average the eight particle predictive distributions and score the
resulting mixture directly, without selecting a particle using held-out targets. All 90 windows completed.
AutoGP reaches mean CRPS0.027, 0.185, and 0.148 on SF6, CFC-12, and CFC-11, giving an equal-record
mean of 0.120. It lowers mean CRPS relative to fixed RBF, CAKE, and validation-selected depth-three
CKS. The Holm-adjusted signed-rank p-values are 7.5×10 −8 against fixed RBF,0.62 against CAKE, and
8.0×10 −8 against CKS. Relative to the selected discovery, AutoGP has paired mean difference+0.029,
with a record-stratified bootstrap interval of [+0.006,+0.055] , 44 wins and 46 losses, and Holm-adjusted
signed-rank p= 0.39 . AutoGP is stronger on forward windows than the discovery,0.028 against 0.034,
although CAKE remains lower at0.022. These results strengthen the classical comparison while preserving
the evidence for cross-record transfer by one frozen structure. In this evaluation, AutoGP infers its structure
from each training window and forecasts the held-out block without seeing its future targets. It does
not update after each held-out observation. AutoGP uses substantially more inference, while the other
primary rows freeze one structure after validation. The 90 windows are fixed and overlap within records,
so the intervals and tests describe variation over these benchmark windows rather than uncertainty over a
population of gas records.
40

--- Page 41 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
4
6
8
10
12
Fixed (RBF)
CRPS 0.021
SF6 (ppt)
480
500
520
540
CRPS 0.187
CFC-12 (ppt), reversed
220
240
260
CRPS 0.156
CFC-11 (ppt), reversed
4
6
8
10
12Input warping
CRPS 0.059
480
500
520
540
CRPS 0.033
220
240
260
CRPS 0.034
4
6
8
10
12CAKE
CRPS 0.012
480
500
520
540
CRPS 0.148
220
240
260
CRPS 0.031
2000 2010 2020
Year
4
6
8
10
12Discovery
CRPS 0.033
2000 2010 2020
Year
480
500
520
540
CRPS 0.056
2000 2010 2020
Year
220
240
260
CRPS 0.031
Figure 17: Posterior forecasts of the validation-selected kernels on the median-CRPS window of each
record (rows are methods, columns are records). Black dots are the observed prefix, hollow markers are the
held-out 48 months, and light grey dots are the rest of the record. Lines and bands are the predictive mean
and 95% interval including observation noise, in parts per trillion (ppt). Both CFC windows are reversed,
so the forecast runs backward from the dotted origin. Panel CRPS is on the standardized scale of Table 14.
Forecast visualizations.Following the forecast displays of Saad et al. (2023) and Saad et al. (2024),
Figure 17 plots the posterior predictive of each validation-selected representative on one window per
record, with the surrounding record retained for context. To avoid choosing windows that favor any method,
we take the window on which the selected discovery has its median CRPS among the 30 windows of
that record, and plot every method on that same window. The SF6 window runs forward, and both CFC
windows are reversed, so the model backcasts toward the concentration peak. On CFC-12, the fixed RBF
kernel follows the broader trend of the training window past the peak, and CAKE extends the recent linear
decline. Both have narrow intervals. The discovery and input warping flatten toward the plateau, and
their intervals cover the held-out record. On CFC-11, the fixed kernel again overshoots, and CAKE, input
warping, and the discovery reach similar CRPS. On the forward SF6 window, CAKE and the fixed kernel
track the linear rise more tightly than the discovery, whose interval widens with the horizon.
Long-horizon diagnostic.The 48-month benchmark mixes forward and reversed windows. We therefore
add a deterministic diagnostic that trains on each record except its final 120 months and forecasts those
ten years forward. At this much longer horizon, CAKE reaches CRPS 0.057, 0.038, and 0.075 on SF6,
41

--- Page 42 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
4
6
8
10
12
Fixed (RBF)
CRPS 0.092
SF6 (ppt)
480
500
520
540
CRPS 0.052
CFC-12 (ppt)
210
220
230
240
250
260
CRPS 0.594
CFC-11 (ppt)
4
6
8
10
12Input warping
CRPS 0.563
480
500
520
540
CRPS 0.047
 210
220
230
240
250
260
CRPS 0.108
4
6
8
10
12CAKE
CRPS 0.057
480
500
520
540
CRPS 0.038
 210
220
230
240
250
260
CRPS 0.075
2010 2020
Year
4
6
8
10
12Discovery
CRPS 0.117
2010 2020
Year
480
500
520
540
CRPS 0.079
2010 2020
Year
210
220
230
240
250
260
CRPS 0.150
Figure 18: Forward forecasts of the final 120 months of each record, a horizon 2.5 times longer than the
main benchmark (rows are methods, columns are records). Black dots are the observed prefix, hollow
markers are the held-out final ten years, and the dotted line is the forecast origin. Lines and bands are
the predictive mean and 95% interval including observation noise, in ppt. Panel CRPS is on the training-
standardized scale, and bold marks the lowest value in each column.
CFC-12, and CFC-11, compared with 0.117, 0.079, and 0.150 for the selected discovery. Figure 18 helps
localize this gap. The discovery tends to flatten its posterior mean and widen its interval, while CAKE
preserves the record-specific long-run direction more closely. These three diagnostic splits favor CAKE
for ten-year forward prediction. The discovery’s gains on the 48-month benchmark, which mixes forward
and reversed windows, therefore do not establish an advantage at this longer forward horizon. Because
both methods were selected on the original validation windows, the horizon change alone does not explain
their performance gap.
Additive decomposition.To examine how the selected discovery represents a rise-to-decline transition,
Figure 19 decomposes its posterior on the predeclared CFC-12 peak-origin split with a 120-month horizon.
The Matérn and low-frequency sinusoid-bank components jointly represent the trajectory, while the fitted
constant component is negligible. The wide component intervals show that the additive allocation is
uncertain outside the observed range. The Matérn component carries most of the curvature, and the
sinusoid bank adds a smooth, nearly linear drift. The sinusoid bank therefore acts as a slow trend on
this record, not as an annual seasonal component. The training residuals are small relative to the signal
42

--- Page 43 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
−200
0
200
Full posterior, centered CFC-12 (ppt)
−250
0
250
Mat´ ern-5/2,ℓ= 0.5
−25
0
25
Constant
−500
0
Sinusoid bank
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
Year
−5
0
5
Residuals
=
+
+
Figure 19: Additive posterior decomposition of the selected discovery on CFC-12 (peak-origin split,
120-month horizon). Top row: observed and held-out points with the posterior mean and its two-standard-
deviation band. Next rows: the Matérn, constant, and combined sinusoid-bank components, then the
training residuals. All rows are deviations from the training mean in ppt, so the component means sum to
the full posterior mean. The dashed line is the forecast origin, and the split CRPS is0.070.
and show no visible trend. The split-level CRPS of 0.070 is an interpretive example, not an aggregate
performance claim.
E Scientific Structure Discovery
This appendix details the enzyme-kinetics (§4.3.3) and glucose-dynamics (§4.3.4) benchmarks. Both
follow the same split-and-freeze principle. Search and validation data are disjoint from the test data, which
come from unseen enzyme mechanisms or glucose patients. Each frozen kernel is evaluated on episodes
that search never sees. Both benchmarks use the construction contracts of §3.1 unchanged. The input
encodings, oracles, and evaluation protocols are described below.
E.1 Enzyme Kinetics (ChemBench)
ChemBench, the ActiveSciBench-Chem benchmark of Kabra et al. (2026), poses enzyme-kinetics rate-law
discovery as a seven-input, one-output regression problem. Substrate concentration CA, inhibitor concen-
tration CI, second-substrate concentration CB, product concentration CP , enzyme loading, temperature,
and pH map to an observed reaction rate r0. Training uses ten canonical single-mechanism domains
(Michaelis-Menten saturation, four inhibition types, Arrhenius temperature dependence, pH activity,
ping-pong bisubstrate kinetics, substrate inhibition, and Hill cooperativity). The five structurally distinct
held-out mechanisms are ordered bi-bi kinetics, reversible Michaelis-Menten, allosteric activation, fractal
kinetics, and metal-ion activation. None is a recombination of the training mechanisms. The evaluator
only calls the oracle’s publicrun(params) interface and never reads the underlying rate-law code. Search
fitness is negative held-out CRPS plus a worst-domain penalty (mirroring the worst-case robustness term
of Equation (5), Appendix A.3), computed on the ten training domains only.
The validation-selected ensemble campaign E1 maps the normalized input x= (a, i, b, p, e, t, h) to a nine-
dimensional biochemical geometry before applying an RBF base kernel. Let sig(z) = (1 +e −z)−1 denote
43

--- Page 44 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
10−2 100 102
Substrate [ CA] (mM)
0.0
0.5
1.0
Normalized feature
logistic midpoint
≈ 253 mM (oﬀ-box)
(a) Saturation 10◦C 40◦C 70◦C 90◦C
275 300 325 350
Temperature (K)
0.0
0.5
1.0 Ea = 34 .6 kJ/mol
(b) Arrhenius temperature
4 6 8 10
pH
0.0
0.5
1.0
pHopt = 6 .28
(c) pH window
10−2 10−1 100 101 102
Substrate [ CA] (mM)
0
10
20
30
40
50Inhibitor [ CI ] (mM)
(d) Inhibitor–substrate coupling
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
γI i s(a)
10−2 10−1 100 101 102
Substrate [ CA] (mM)
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
Co-substrate [ CB] (mM)
(e) Bisubstrate coupling
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
s(a) s(b)/2
Figure 20:The discovered ChemBench kernel is assembled from interpretable biochemical features.
Top: substrate saturation, Arrhenius temperature dependence, and the pH window, each normalized to
compare shape. At their frozen weights, the temperature and pH features vary by less than 10−5 and
0.02 across the input box (Appendix F.2). Bottom: the inhibitor–substrate coupling ξI i s(a) and the
bisubstrate coupling 1
2 s(a)s(b), the fourth and eighth features of Equation (24), on a log color scale with
white contours at each decade. Both grow with substrate concentration because the saturation midpoint
lies above the100mM bound.
the logistic sigmoid, s(z) = sig((z−µ A)/σA), TK(t) = 278 + 90t, h0 = (pHopt −4)/6 , ¯w=wpH/6,
and
q(h) = sig
 h−h 0 + ¯w
¯w/2

1−sig
 h−h 0 −¯w
¯w/2

.(23)
Its discovered transform is
Tchem(x) =

ξAs(a), ξAs(b), e, ξI i s(a), 1
2 p s(a),
ξT e−Ea/(R TK(t)), ξpHq(h), 1
2 s(a)s(b), 1
2

,
(24)
Here, R= 8.314 J/(mol K), and Ea is expressed in J/mol inside the exponential. We obtained the
frozen parameters from 32 Halton trials initialized at the agent’s values. For example, tuning moved
Ea from 20 to 34.65 kJ/mol and ξA from 1 to 1.991. The frozen values are (ξA, ξI , ξT , ξpH) =
(1.991,1.125,0.0864,0.0195) , (µA, σA) = (1.101,0.207) , Ea = 34.65 kJ/mol, pHopt = 6.282 , and
wpH = 0.201.
The learned distance represents saturation, inhibitor and product coupling, and bisubstrate interaction
jointly rather than treating the seven coordinates as exchangeable. The program includes temperature and
pH features. However, the frozen kernel shows almost no sensitivity to these inputs in the coordinate-sweep
diagnostic (Appendix F.2). Figure 20 plots the components.
Nine separate stochastic evolutionary campaigns (eight archive-linked proposal runs per campaign) each
produced a distinct validation-selected program, seven input transforms (one of them residual) and two
feature maps. The strongest programs encode saturation, inhibition and substrate interactions, temperature
dependence, and pH sensitivity, giving an inspectable representation of the learned input geometry. On the
common 75 held-out episodes (Figure 22), the five campaigns with the lowest validation CRPS improve
mean CRPS over the strongest evaluated fixed reference by 9.5%–23.0%, and each improves the mean
44

--- Page 45 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Test CRPS on 75 held-out episodes (lower is better)
Optimized ARD
Coordinate-aware DKL
Domain-feature library
Monotone warping
Isotropic Mat´ ern
Shared-coordinate DKL
Campaign 1
Campaign 2
Campaign 3
Campaign 4
Campaign 5
Campaign 6
Campaign 7
Campaign 8
Campaign 9
Astra 1
Astra 2
Astra 3
0.5554
0.3115
Fixed Mat´ ern-5/2 (0.721)Tuned references (5 initializations)
Ensemble campaigns
GPT-6 Astra campaigns
Tuner mean ± SD
Validation-selected init.
Campaign, val. CRPS < 0.70
Campaign, val. CRPS ≥ 0.70
Selected by validation
Figure 21:Matched ChemBench references and discovery campaigns on the same 75 test episodes.
Squares mark each reference’s validation-selected initialization, and bars give mean ± SD over five
initializations. Each campaign point is its validation-selected frozen discovery, green if validation CRPS is
below 0.70 and grey otherwise. Blue rings mark the campaign selected overall. The dotted line is fixed
Matérn-5/2. Historical campaigns keep their original budgets.
on all five held-out mechanisms. The other four validate markedly worse (0.73–0.79 against 0.62–0.67)
and range from a 1.8% gain to a 10.6% loss. Validation and test CRPS agree closely across campaigns
(Spearman ρ= 0.95 , p <10 −4), and the mean improvement over all nine is 8.13% (sample SD 10.90
percentage points, range −10.6% to 23.0%). This dispersion is across complete search campaigns. The 75
test episodes are shared across campaigns, so pooling all 675 scores as independent observations would
overstate the evidence. Campaigns reuse scheduler seeds 0–7 and differ through stochastic proposals, so
they are repeated campaigns and not nine disjoint deterministic seed schedules. The strongest candidate
also has 18.6% lower CRPS than the best evaluated input-warping fit. The following comparison uses a
shared predictive objective to assess this geometry against stronger learned references.
Matched predictive-objective references.We fit isotropic Matérn, independently scaled ARD, mono-
tone coordinate warps, an author-defined domain-feature library, and two DKL architectures on the same
20 training episodes. Every method uses five initializations (seeds 101–105) and up to 300 full-batch
Adam evaluations at learning rate 0.01, with the outer amplitude and noise chosen on the benchmark grid.
Validation episodes select one initialization per arm before any test evaluation, and structural parameters
are then frozen on the common 75 held-out episodes. Coordinate-aware DKL uses a 7→16→8 ReLU
feature map with an RBF head, and the shared-coordinate control sums coordinate activations before the
head. The domain library is a researcher-defined reference informed by the domain, not an automatic
discovery.
Table 16 compares the validation-selected kernels with each reference over the 75 held-out episodes. The
ensemble selection E1 has the lowest mean test CRPS of the ensemble campaigns and the references,
but it is not significantly better than optimized ARD, coordinate-aware DKL, or the domain library
after Holm correction. We therefore describe it as competitive with them. The frontier selection F2
is significantly better than all six references and wins on at least 71 of 75 episodes against each. Its
improvement over Matérn-5/2 is 38%, 80%, 87%, 70%, and 27% on ordered bi-bi, reversible Michaelis–
45

--- Page 46 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 16: Paired comparison of the validation-selected ChemBench kernels with the matched references
over 75 held-out episodes. Entries give the mean CRPS difference (discovery minus reference, negative
favors the discovery), its within-mechanism paired-bootstrap 95% interval where computed, episodes won,
and the Holm-adjusted two-sided Wilcoxonp-value across the six references.
Reference (test CRPS) Ensemble E1 (0.555) Frontier F2 (0.312)
Optimized ARD (0.567)−0.012 [−0.033,0.010],p= 0.87−0.256 [−0.326,−0.193], 73/75,
p= 6×10 −13
Coordinate-aware DKL (0.581)−0.025 [−0.054,0.001],p= 0.32−0.269 [−0.346,−0.202], 71/75,
p= 2×10 −12
Domain library (0.588)−0.032 [−0.054,−0.011] , p= 0.13−0.276 [−0.347,−0.215], 75/75,
p= 3×10 −13
Monotone warping (0.655)−0.100,p= 3×10 −11 −0.344, 71/75,p= 6×10 −13
Isotropic Matérn (0.712)−0.156,p= 8×10 −13 −0.400, 74/75,p= 3×10 −13
Shared-coordinate DKL (0.783)−0.228,p= 1×10 −12 −0.472, 74/75,p= 3×10 −13
Menten, allosteric activation, fractal kinetics, and metal activation. Every frontier campaign improves
every held-out mechanism. In frontier campaigns F2 and F3, only four of eight runs submitted a program,
because the tuner rejects programs with more than twelve parameters (Appendix B.6).
The Astra kernel.The frontier F2 kernel is a feature map on the seven public inputs, and it never
reads the oracle’s rate laws. It builds ten substrate-response shapes modeled on the training rate laws:
Michaelis–Menten saturation, competitive, uncompetitive, and noncompetitive inhibition by the inhibitor
and by the product, ping-pong bisubstrate kinetics, substrate inhibition, and Hill cooperativity. Each shape
is evaluated at three substrate scales and paired with its sensitivity to log substrate concentration. The result
is multiplied by enzyme, Arrhenius-like temperature, and pH-ionization factors, and a linear backbone is
added. Its eleven parameters are tuned by the Halton search. An unseen mechanism is thus predicted as
a combination of known mechanism shapes and their local variations, much like a library of canonical
mechanisms in model discovery (Murphy, 2026).
These comparisons describe the strongest of nine frozen discoveries, which is also the campaign that
validation selects. Across campaigns, eight of nine have lower mean CRPS than fixed Matérn, while
one has lower mean CRPS than optimized ARD and coordinate-aware DKL. The search can therefore
produce an inspectable geometry that competes with learned references, but its average outcome is weaker.
Figure 21 separates the individual campaigns from the reference fits.
All six reference arms complete every test episode.
Figure 23 compares local predictions on two held-out mechanisms. Figure 23a shows a substrate-
concentration slice of the held-out fractal-kinetics mechanism. The discovered kernel follows the near-flat
region and the subsequent rise more closely than the fixed Matérn baseline, which predicts a large negative
excursion before overshooting at high concentration. The discovered mean also deviates from the true
curve at high concentrations. These local curves illustrate predictive behavior, while aggregate held-out
performance is measured across episodes.
The ordered bi-bi slice (Figure 23b) shows a similar local advantage at low concentrations, followed by
overestimation as concentration increases. Both models have wide predictive intervals. These examples
illustrate differences in posterior means and uncertainty, but do not by themselves establish interval
calibration or recovery of the underlying rate law.
On the training-domain competitive-inhibition diagnostic, the discovered kernel improves aggregate CRPS
at the twenty-experiment budget, while its posterior mean resolves inhibitor-level differences less clearly
than the dense oracle curves. This distinguishes predictive accuracy with sparse observations from recovery
of individual input effects. Mechanism-transfer performance is evaluated separately on the five held-out
mechanisms.
E.2 Glucose Dynamics (GlucoseBench)
GlucoseBench (Murphy, 2026) adapts the simglucose implementation (Xie, 2018) of the UV A/Padova
type-1 diabetes simulator (Kovatchev et al., 2009). Each of 30 virtual profiles, comprising 10 children, 10
adolescents, and 10 adults, has a hidden 13-dimensional nonlinear ordinary differential equation (ODE)
46

--- Page 47 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Validation CRPS
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Test CRPS (75 held-out episodes)
Mat´ ern-5/2 (test)
Ensemble (9)
GPT-6 Astra (3)
V alidation-selected
Figure 22:Validation CRPS predicts held-out CRPS across ChemBench campaigns.Validation and
test CRPS of the validation-selected kernel of each search campaign, nine ensemble and three GPT-6
Astra, on 75 held-out episodes from five mechanisms never seen during search (lower is better, Spearman
ρ= 0.95 over the ensemble campaigns). Rings mark the campaign that validation selects within each
proposer, and the dashed line is fixed Matérn-5/2 (ℓ=1, test CRPS0.721).
−400
−200
0
200
Reaction rate r0
Mat´ ern-5/2 Discovered Reference
10−2 10−1 100 101 102
Substrate [ CA] (mM)
100
101
102
|error|
(a) Predicted reaction rate versus substrate concentration
[CA] on the held-out fractal-kinetics mechanism, on a
finer query grid than the benchmark. The discovered
kernel (green) follows the true rate (black) more closely
than the fixed baseline (orange), which predicts a large
negative excursion. Both curves deviate at high concen-
trations.
−10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Reaction rate r0
Mat´ ern-5/2 Discovered Reference
10−2 10−1 100 101 102
Substrate [ CA] (mM)
10−1
100
101
|error|
(b) Predicted reaction rate versus substrate concentra-
tion [CA] on the held-out ordered-bi-bi-kinetics mech-
anism. The discovered kernel (green) is closer to the
true rate (black) at low concentrations. Both it and the
fixed Matérn-5/2 baseline (orange) overestimate the rate
as concentration increases.
Figure 23: Local predictive behavior on two held-out biochemical mechanisms. In each panel, shading
shows ±1.96 predictive standard deviations. The lower strip shows the absolute error of each posterior
mean, tinted where the discovered kernel is closer.
state. An episode lasts six hours, the patient eats one meal and may receive one insulin bolus, and a
continuous glucose monitor (CGM) reports noisy glucose every five minutes. The benchmark asks for
forecasts of CGM after a 45-minute prefix of a new intervention for the same patient.
Inputs and predictive rule.A GP input is one CGM reading, encoded as five coordinates in [0,1] :
reading time, meal size, meal start, bolus size, and bolus start, all read from the public delivered-input log.
The last four are constant within an episode, so the kernel decides both how readings correlate over time
and how whole trajectories share strength across interventions. For each forecast, amplitude and noise
47

--- Page 48 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
are fit by training likelihood on the full training episodes only, and the query prefix only conditions the
posterior, as the benchmark protocol requires.
Protocol.KERNAUThas no experiment design, so every kernel sees the same six training episodes per
patient: the two passive benchmark episodes and four distinct menu interventions drawn with a fixed
per-patient seed. Search scores leave-one-training-episode-out forecasts on the ten child profiles, so every
search target is a public training episode. Validation uses the same folds on the ten adolescent profiles.
The validation-selected kernel is then frozen and tested on the ten adult profiles with the benchmark’s own
evaluator and sealed test interventions, twelve per patient. We report CGM normalized MSE. For query q
of patientp, letMSE pq be the mean squared error of the forecast over the forecast window. Then
nMSEpq = MSEpq
max

Var(ypassive
p ),1
 ,(25)
where Var(ypassive
p ) is the population variance of the CGM readings in the first two passive training
episodes of patient p. The benchmark takes the arithmetic mean of nMSEpq over the queries of each
patient, then the geometric mean across patients.
This protocol learns a kernel on some profiles and applies it to others. Forecasting remains within patient,
since each test patient’s GP is fit only on that patient’s episodes, but kernel selection pools information
across profiles, which the per-patient benchmark does not do. The model discovery agent of Murphy (2026)
chooses its training interventions actively and fits per-patient ODE models, whereas our interventions are
fixed, so its reported numbers are not directly comparable to ours.
References.The baseline kernel structures tuned across patients use the child profiles and the same
64-trial Halton budget as the discoveries, and all pass Tier 2. The per-patient marginal-likelihood baselines
described below instead fit on each target patient. The relative-time grid applies RBF or Matérn kernels to
time, time since the meal, time since the bolus, meal size, and bolus size. Relative-time ARD-Matérn-5/2
and ARD-RBF use the same five relative inputs with one lengthscale each. Raw-input ARD-Matérn-5/2
uses the five raw coordinates. The physiological library is written by the authors. It combines gamma-
shaped meal-absorption and insulin-action curves, their interaction, and a Matérn residual. Two per-patient
references fit ARD-Matérn-5/2 by marginal likelihood on each patient’s own training data, on raw and on
relative inputs, which is standard practice and pools nothing across patients. We also report the fixed-kernel
family winners selected on training data, the best fixed kernel in hindsight, and persistence (the last
observed value).
Results.Figure 24 reports every method at four training budgets and four prefix lengths. Table 17
compares each discovery with the strongest reference, patient by patient. Both Astra campaigns have the
same validation error (0.203), and validation CRPS picks campaign 1 (0.204 against 0.205). Among the
ensemble campaigns, validation ranks them in their test order. Across all 24 evaluated kernels, adolescent
validation error predicts adult test error with Spearman ρ= 0.94 (p= 10 −11), close to the 0.95 we find
for ChemBench.
The relative-time representation explains much of the gain over the original fixed kernels, as the tuned
relative-time ARD reference shows. The Astra discoveries still improve on it by about 22% at the main
setting (b6 c45) and at almost every other setting. With two training episodes, the five discoveries reduce
geometric-mean nMSE by 38–67% relative to this reference. With six episodes at a 45-minute prefix, the
reductions are 0–23%. The p-values in Table 17 are raw. After Holm correction over all 35 cells, none
remain below 0.05. With a 180-minute prefix, no discovery has a raw p-value below 0.05 in the favorable
direction. Ensemble c1 and c3 have higher error there (raw p= 0.020 and 0.037), and those two contrasts
also fall above 0.05 after the same Holm correction. Against the original fixed kernels, all three ensemble
discoveries win on 8 to 10 of 10 patients (p≤0.02 ), with 31–46% lower error. Against the per-patient
ML-II references, every discovery wins on all 10 patients.
Robustness to the training interventions.We redraw the four random training interventions with two
other seeds and also use the demonstration policy from the benchmark’s README. Ensemble c2 remains
the best method under all three alternatives (adult b6, normalized mean squared error (nMSE) at c45 and
c0): seed 1 0.370/0.367 against 0.403/0.414 for relative-time ARD-Matérn, seed 2 0.370/0.362 against
0.429/0.435, and the README policy0.357/0.353against0.377/0.385.
48

--- Page 49 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
b2 c45 b3 c45 b4 c45 b6 c45 b6 c0 b6 c120 b6 c180
Frontier F1 (selected)
Frontier F2
Ensemble c2
Ensemble c1
Ensemble c3
Rel.-time ARD-Mat´ ern
Rel.-time ARD-RBF
Rel.-time grid
Physiological library
Raw ARD-Mat´ ern
Per-patient ML-II, relative
Per-patient ML-II, raw
Best ﬁxed in hindsight (RQ)
Train-selected ﬁxed
Persistence (uncolored)
0.57 0.48 0.51 0.37 0.36 0.39 0.39
1.06 0.54 0.56 0.37 0.36 0.39 0.40
0.61 0.47 0.54 0.40 0.39 0.42 0.39
0.90 0.76 0.67 0.42 0.41 0.46 0.45
0.86 0.62 0.59 0.47 0.49 0.49 0.52
1.70 0.93 0.74 0.47 0.48 0.47 0.40
1.33 0.97 0.83 0.51 0.55 0.51 0.44
1.80 1.07 0.85 0.54 0.57 0.66 0.44
0.87 0.76 0.67 0.59 0.51 0.76 0.66
1.08 0.84 0.74 0.61 0.62 0.56 0.44
1.57 1.34 1.21 0.81 0.84 0.85 0.85
1.72 1.42 1.38 1.21 1.25 1.26 1.24
2.27 1.47 1.18 0.69 0.68 1.07 0.66
1.15 0.94 0.85 0.74 0.80 0.67 0.55
4.97 4.97 4.97 4.97 4.26 3.97 0.90
Box = best colored cell in the column. Persistence is excluded from the color scale and from the best-cell mark. b k: training episodes. c m: preﬁx minutes.
Figure 24:GlucoseBench adult test error for every method and setting.CGM normalized MSE
(arithmetic mean over queries within each patient, then geometric mean over 10 patients), colored on a
log scale where darker is lower. In the column codes, bk means k training episodes and cm means an
m-minute observed prefix. Columns show b2 c45 , b3 c45 , b4 c45 , and b6 c45 , followed by prefix
lengths of 0, 120, and 180 minutes at six training episodes. Rows are the discovered kernels, the tuned
references, and the fixed-kernel and persistence baselines. Rel.-time uses time since the meal and bolus
as inputs, and ML-II is per-patient marginal-likelihood fitting. A box marks the best colored cell in each
column. Persistence is printed under the heatmap and is left off the color scale.
Table 17: Paired per-patient comparison with the strongest reference, relative-time ARD-Matérn. In
each column, bk denotes k training episodes and cm denotes an m-minute observed prefix. Each cell
gives patients won out of 10, the raw two-sided exact Wilcoxon p-value, and the percentage change in
geometric-mean nMSE. Negative percentages are lower error. A win count of 5 is an even split. Holm
adjustment over these 35 cells leaves every adjustedp-value above0.05(minimum0.068).
Discovery b2 c45 b3 c45 b4 c45 b6 c0 b6 c45 b6 c120 b6 c180
Frontier F1
10, .002
−67%
9, .004
−48%
9, .027
−31%
10, .002
−26%
10, .002
−23%
10, .002
−18%
6, 1.0
−3%
Frontier F2
8, .014
−38%
10, .002
−42%
7, .027
−25%
10, .002
−26%
8, .020
−22%
9, .014
−17%
6, .92
−2%
Ensemble c2
9, .004
−64%
10, .002
−50%
8, .037
−27%
8, .020
−20%
7, .049
−15%
8, .014
−12%
5, .62
−3%
Ensemble c1
10, .002
−47%
6, .28
−19%
5, .77
−10%
8, .027
−16%
7, .23
−10%
7, .56
−3%
2, .020
+12%
Ensemble c3
10, .002
−50%
9, .010
−33%
7, .19
−20%
5, 1.0
+2%
5, .77
+0%
5, .77
+4%
2, .037
+28%
Ablation.We remove feature groups from the frozen ensemble c2 kernel without retuning. Without the
meal features, adult error rises from 0.402 to 1.164, and without the insulin features to 0.522. Removing
the interaction terms instead slightly improves adult error to 0.380 (validation 0.252 against 0.238). The
meal and insulin features carry the gain, and the interaction terms do not help.
What the best ensemble kernel encodes.Ensemble c2 is an explicit 16-feature program on time
since the meal and time since the bolus. It uses the feature-map contract, so the interpreter forms
k(x, x′) =φ(x) ⊤φ(x′). It does not pass a learned neural representation to a separate RBF or Matérn
head. After tuning, the meal gate is a logistic function of time since the meal. It is half open at 46 minutes,
49

--- Page 50 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
0 100 200 300
Minutes since meal
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Gate (0 to 1)
Meal response
0 100 200 300
Minutes since bolus
Insulin response
Figure 25:The selected glucose kernel encodes a delayed meal effect and a fading insulin effect.The
two gates of the ensemble campaign-2 feature map after tuning, as functions of time since the meal and
since the bolus. Dotted lines mark the 46-minute midpoint of the meal gate and the 23-minute start of the
insulin gate. After that start, insulin decays with a time constant of 127 minutes.
50
100
150
200
250
300CGM (mg/dL)
2 training episodes
Relative-time ARD-Mat´ ern
Discovered kernel (Astra)
Observed preﬁx
Held-out CGM
50
100
150
200
250
300
6 training episodes
Relative-time ARD-Mat´ ern
Discovered kernel (Astra)
Observed preﬁx
Held-out CGM
0
50
Meal
(g)
0
50
0 60 120 180 240 300 360
Minutes since episode start
0
1
Bolus
(U)
0 60 120 180 240 300 360
Minutes since episode start
0
1
Figure 26:With two training episodes the reference undershoots the meal response, with six the gap
closes.One adult and one held-out query, forecast after the 45-minute prefix (dotted line) from 2 versus 6
training episodes. Curves are posterior means with 95% intervals for the validation-selected Astra kernel
(campaign 1) and relative-time ARD-Matérn. Lower panels show the delivered meal and bolus. The patient
is a median case for the ensemble kernel.
and it goes from 10% to 90% open over about 76 minutes (logistic scale 17 minutes). The insulin gate is
zero before 23 minutes after the bolus. After that, it decays with a time constant of about 127 minutes.
Coordinate sweeps (as in Appendix F.2) give kernel correlations of 0.44 for time, 0.83 for meal size, 0.50
for meal start,0.94for bolus size, and0.95for bolus start.
Calibration.At b6 c45, both Astra discoveries lower mean CRPS by about 15% relative to relative-time
ARD-Matérn, win on all 10 adults (p= 0.002 ), and are indistinguishable from each other (p= 0.92 ). Their
nominal 95% intervals cover about 82% of adult readings, compared with 76% for that strongest tuned
reference and 77–79% for the ensemble discoveries. The Astra kernels therefore improve probabilistic
accuracy and reduce undercoverage, but they remain below the nominal level. The physiological library is
the exception at 93%.
50

--- Page 51 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
BBO Forecasting Chemistry
Target domain (test split)
BBO (DWF)
Forecasting
(period-bank + poly)
Chemistry
(campaign 1)†
Source kernel
+1.7%∗
39/60
+44.4%∗
54/90
−2.7%∗
29/75
+2.2%∗
41/60
+55.6%∗
58/90
−0.5%
37/75
−17.5%∗
14/60
−67.6%∗
21/90
+23.0%∗
74/75
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
CRPS improvement over ﬁxed reference (%)
Figure 27:Cross-domain reuse of validation-selected kernels.Rows are source kernels and columns are
target domains. Each cell gives the target test CRPS change (%) relative to that domain’s fixed reference
and the number of evaluation units won. Negative CRPS changes mean lower error and better performance.
Purple favors the transferred kernel and brown favors the reference. Stars mark unadjusted paired tests
with p <0.05 . †The chemistry-source cells use the fixed coordinate conversion described below, so read
them as interface-compatibility checks.
F Transfer and Interpretation of Discovered Kernels
This appendix reports how validation-selected kernels transfer across domains and how we read what each
discovered kernel encodes.
F.1 Cross-Domain Transfer of Selected Kernels
We test whether performance in one domain identifies kernels that remain useful in another. We transfer
frozen BBO kernels to greenhouse-gas forecasting, forecasting kernels to held-out BBO tasks, and the
validation-selected kernels from both domains to ChemBench. We also test the selected chemistry kernel
in the other two domains. Only the outer amplitude and noise variance are refit, so every comparison
measures reuse of a fixed kernel structure rather than another round of search.
Figure 27 separates reuse from target-specific advantage. DWF approaches the best fixed kernel chosen
separately for each forecasting record, but it does not match the kernel discovered for forecasting. The
forecasting selection yields a smaller improvement on BBO. Neither selection improves ChemBench,
whose seven named inputs encode different scientific roles. The chemistry kernel can be made executable
on BBO and forecasting, but it trails the fixed reference in both. Assigning arbitrary coordinates to roles
such as substrate concentration does not preserve the biochemical geometry that helps on unseen enzyme
mechanisms.
Fixed conversion for the chemistry kernel.The selected chemistry program directly indexes seven
inputs with biochemical meanings, so it cannot run on the original BBO and forecasting inputs. For the
exploratory cells in Figure 27, we copy up to the first seven target coordinates, fill missing coordinates
with 0.5, and ignore an eighth coordinate. The rule is fixed before evaluation and does not use outcomes.
It produces no execution failures, but raises CRPS by 17.5% on BBO and 67.6% on forecasting relative
to each domain’s fixed reference. It wins 14 of 60 BBO tasks ( p= 5.8×10 −7) and 21 of 90 forecast
windows (p= 1.1×10 −5) in two-sided paired Wilcoxon tests. We treat these as compatibility checks
rather than direct semantic transfer because the copied coordinates do not become biochemical variables.
F.2 Natural-Language Descriptions of Discovered Kernels
The Automatic Statistician turns a kernel found by compositional search into a natural-language report
(Duvenaud et al., 2013; Lloyd et al., 2014). Each base kernel and operator in its grammar has a sentence
template, so the report is correct by construction for any kernel the grammar can express. The connection
between executable descriptions and kernel geometry also motivates Hamzi and Hutter (2026). KERNAUT
51

--- Page 52 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 18: Plain-language reports of the headline discoveries. Each report is condensed from the agent’s
registered formulation and checked against the frozen program with the trusted interpreter. The right
column states what tuning settled.
Kernel Report What tuning settled
DWF (BBO) The objective varies smoothly, as under a
Matérn-5/2 prior, along a slightly rescaled copy
of each coordinate. Values at points mirrored
about the middle of a coordinate,uand
1.025−u, are encouraged but not forced to
agree. The prior has a kink at the mirror line
u= 0.513.
Tuned geometry: the fold frequency settled at
ν= 0.975 , so the fold is a single tent peaking
at0.513that reflects each coordinate once,
and the warp stays within0.027of the
identity (Appendix C.2). The registration had
anticipated multi-scale periodicity and
boundary sensitivity, which the tuned kernel
does not use. The kink is Proposition 4.
Residual
period-bank +
poly
(forecasting)
The record follows a smooth trend, as under a
Matérn-5/2 prior with lengthscale0.5of the
normalized span, plus a constant offset, plus a
second smooth component built from 36
sinusoids. Every sinusoid has a period between
7 and 47 times the length of the record, so
within one record this component acts as a
record-wide smooth trend rather than a cycle.
Tuned behavior: the sinusoid frequencies
settled at0.021–0.143cycles per normalized
span, so the bank models slow curvature
across the whole record. The registration
described an annual cycle, but it took the
annual period (about0.03of the span) as a
frequency. An annual cycle would need 25–47
cycles per span. The “poly” feature is a
constant.
ChemBench,
ensemble E1
(enzyme
kinetics)
The rate depends smoothly on a monotone
transform of log substrate concentration that is
steepest at high concentration, the same
transform of the second substrate, their product,
and log enzyme loading. Inhibitor and product
concentrations matter only in proportion to
substrate saturation.
Tuned relevance: as in ARD, tuning decides
which inputs matter. Enzyme loading and the
two substrates matter most, while inhibitor
and product matter little (Figure 28), and the
saturation midpoint lies above the input range
(Figure 20). The program includes Arrhenius
and pH-window features, but tuning set their
weights so that the correlation is1.000000at
every base point. These probes show little
sensitivity to temperature and pH, without
establishing exact invariance.
has no grammar to attach templates to, but every discovery run registers a formulation before it submits
code (§3.4). The registration states the mathematical form, the closest known kernel, and the behavior the
agent expects. It is written before tuning, however, so it describes what the agent intended rather than what
the tuned kernel does. We therefore condense each registration into a short report and check every claim
against the frozen program with the trusted interpreter.
Table 18 gives the reports for the headline discoveries. The second column describes the frozen kernel.
The third states what tuning settled, which the registration could not know in advance.
Residual period-bank kernel.The name describes the selected forecasting program. Its frozen covari-
ance is
kPB(t, t′) =k 5/2
0.5 (t, t′) +a+
4X
m=1
8X
j=0
vj cos

2πfmj(t−t ′)

,(26)
where t is time normalized to [0,1] , a= 0.015625 , fmj =m(f c + (j−4)b/9) , and vj = exp(−(j−
4)2/(2σ2)). The frozen parameters are fc = 0.02844, b≈0.0162222222 , and σ≈2.630177515 . The
interpreter adds the feature inner product to the trusted Matérn- 5/2 kernel with lengthscale 0.5. Each
sine–cosine feature pair gives one cosine term in Equation (26). The feature labeled polynomial in the
program is constant. An outer covariance amplitude and observation noise are fitted separately under
Equation (13).
F.3 Coordinate-Sweep Diagnostics
We inspect the frozen covariance by drawing 100 base points uniformly from the input box. For each
coordinate, we compare the kernel correlation k(x, x′)/
p
k(x, x)k(x′, x′) after setting that coordinate to
52

--- Page 53 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Table 18: Plain-language reports of the headline discoveries, continued.
Kernel Report What tuning settled
ChemBench,
frontier F2
(enzyme
kinetics)
An explicit 248-feature map treats the rate as a
linear combination of ten substrate-response
shapes modeled on the training mechanisms,
each at three substrate scales, their log-substrate
sensitivities, and a small linear backbone. The
response features are multiplied by enzyme,
temperature, and pH factors, so posterior
coefficients can select both mechanism shape
and environmental modulation.
Tuned relevance: enzyme loading and
substrate dominate, product, inhibitor, and
temperature matter less, and pH is nearly
ignored (Figure 28). The frozen kernel
therefore retains strong enzyme and substrate
effects, some product and inhibitor response,
and almost no pH dependence.
GlucoseBench,
frontier F1
An ARD-Matérn-5/2 residual is augmented by
36 intervention features. At three response
scales, gamma envelopes encode causal meal
and bolus transients, long-period wave packets
encode response age, and cumulative channels
retain dose exposure after the transients fade.
Signed and complementary channels allow meal
and bolus responses to oppose or covary.
Tuned behavior: signed channels dominate
because their mixing parameter isρ= 0.20,
while cumulative memory remains active with
gain0.56. The base kernel’s time lengthscale
is3.21normalized spans and its four
intervention lengthscales are10 6. On public
training inputs, endpoint-sweep correlations
are 0.90 for time, 0.94 for meal size, 0.96 for
meal start, and0.98for bolus size and start.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
input moved from 0 to v
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
kernel correlation
Ensemble campaign 1
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
input moved from 0 to v
Frontier F2 (GPT-6 Astra)
substrate CA
inhibitor CI
2nd substrate CB
product CP
enzyme loading
temperature
pH
Figure 28:The two ChemBench kernels respond to different inputs.Mean kernel correlation as one
normalized input moves from 0 to v with the others fixed, over 100 base points. A curve near 1 indicates
similar normalized kernel features along the sampled sweeps. Left: ensemble campaign E1 depends mainly
on enzyme loading and the two substrates, responds little to inhibitor and product, and shows almost no
temperature or pH sensitivity in these sweeps. Right: frontier campaign F2, which uses GPT-6 Astra,
depends on enzyme loading and substrate, responds mildly to the product, inhibitor, and temperature, and
shows almost no pH sensitivity in these sweeps.
0 and to v∈[0,1] , with the others fixed. Figure 28 plots the mean correlation along each sweep. This
normalization is standard for covariance kernels (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006, Equation 4.35). For
positive diagonal values, the correlation is the inner product of unit-normalized feature vectors, whose
squared distance is twice one minus the correlation. Values near 1 therefore indicate similar normalized
features at the sampled input pairs. They do not rule out changes in marginal variance or prove invariance
over the whole domain. We use the sweep as a diagnostic of kernel geometry, not as a partial-dependence
plot of the fitted predictor.
G Scope and Future Extensions
KERNAUTseparates what an agent may propose from how a proposal becomes a valid kernel. That
separation does not depend on the benchmark, the kernel method, or the problem scale. This section states
the scope of the current experiments and describes the extensions that the framework supports without
changes to its search loop.
53

--- Page 54 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Broader problem settings.The BBO benchmark has at most eight observed input dimensions and
n= 8 + 2d observations per predictive episode. This scale represents the small-data regime in which
kernel choice matters most. Natural next benchmarks include higher-dimensional optimization (d≥20 ),
multi-objective and constrained optimization, and mixed categorical–continuous spaces. These settings do
not require a new validity argument.
Some discoveries already support arbitrary dimensions. For example, DWF transforms each coordinate
separately, so its frozen program runs unchanged as d increases. However, the live-search audit identifies a
limitation in the current interface. Six programs sized their parameter arrays for the benchmark’s eight
coordinates and raised an error at d= 16 (Appendix A.6). The contracts make these failures explicit.
Exposing d to every component, as the spectral interface already does, would prevent this implementation
error.
The contracts can also support larger datasets. Feature-map and spectral contracts produce explicit
finite features, which reduce exact inference from O(n3) to O(nm2) for m features. Inducing-point
approximations (Williams and Seeger, 2001) could provide similar savings for pullback and closure
contracts.
We could also test whether proposers use variable semantics or act only as numerical search procedures. The
intervention would replace informative feature names with arbitrary identifiers while keeping the values,
splits, and budgets fixed. A mixed-type contract could combine learned transformations of continuous
variables with PSD similarity matrices for categorical variables. Comparisons with ARD GPs and tree
ensembles would measure predictive accuracy under matched training. They would also test whether any
gain disappears after feature anonymization. Applying the same anonymization to enzyme kinetics and
glucose would separate structures recovered from data from structures supplied by the proposer’s prior
knowledge.
New construction contracts.Each contract pairs a component interface with an assembly rule and a
PSD proof, so new contracts extend the program space without touching the search loop. Five extensions
follow the same pattern.
• Multi-output kernels.An intrinsic coregionalization contract (Álvarez et al., 2012) would let the agent
supply a factor L and a scalar kernel, with the interpreter assembling W=LL ⊤ and k((x, i),(y, j)) =
Wij k(x, y). The result is PSD by the Schur product theorem.
• Structured inputs.The feature-map contract admits embeddings of sequences and graphs (Gärtner, 2003).
Benchmarks on sequences and molecules would test such inputs directly.
• Continuous spectral measures.The spectral contract certifies finite nonnegative spectra, which covers
random-feature approximations of continuous measures (Rahimi and Recht, 2007). A trusted library of
closed-form spectral densities, such as Gaussian or Cauchy mixtures (Wilson and Adams, 2013), would
certify continuous measures exactly. The interpreter would map raw parameters to nonnegative weights,
as it already does for spectral weights.
• State-space kernels from linear ODEs.Mechanistic model discovery often proposes compartmental
ODEs (Murphy, 2026). A linear ODE driven by white noise defines a GP kernel. Fordz=F z dt+L dW
with stableFand outputy=Hz, the stationary covariance isk(τ) =HP ∞eF ⊤τ H ⊤ forτ≥0. Here,
P∞ solves the Lyapunov equation F P∞ +P ∞F ⊤ +LL ⊤ = 0 (Särkkä et al., 2013). In our framework,
the agent would write the matrices (Fθ, Lθ, Hθ) as functions of θ. The agent would choose the latent
dimension and the coupling pattern. The interpreter would check that Fθ is stable, solve the Lyapunov
equation, and assemble k. The resulting kernel is valid because it is the covariance of a well-defined
Gaussian process. The latent exponentially generated parameterization of Loper et al. (2021) is one
suitable choice. Known inputs, such as meals and insulin doses, would enter through the mean as in
latent force models (Álvarez et al., 2009).
• Recurrent feature maps.The feature-map contract already admits a program that runs a fixed recurrence
or ODE solver over the event history of one input, such as the meals and boluses of one glucose episode,
and returns the state as its feature vector. The kernel isφθ(x)⊤φθ(y), so validity follows from the feature-
map case of Proposition 1, provided that the state depends only on that input and θ. The frontier glucose
kernel F1 already retains dose history through closed-form cumulative-exposure channels (Table 18),
and a recurrence would generalize them. Nonlinear latent dynamics and structural causal world models,
as in model discovery agents (Murphy, 2026), would go further. They would change the search object,
the validity argument, and the evaluation target, so we leave them as a separate direction.
54

--- Page 55 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Other kernel methods and modern applications.We evaluate discovered kernels as GP covariances,
but any method that needs only a PSD kernel can use them, including kernel ridge regression, support
vector machines, and kernel two-sample tests. Two applications are especially promising. In uncertainty
quantification for language models, Kernel Language Entropy builds a PSD kernel over the semantic
similarity of sampled generations (Nikitin et al., 2024). Certified construction would let an agent search
for semantic kernels while keeping the entropy well defined. For scientific surrogates, the enzyme-kinetics
and glucose studies of Appendix E show that discovered geometries can encode domain-specific structure.
Molecular kernels (Griffiths et al., 2023) and kernel methods for differential equations (Chen et al., 2021)
are natural next domains, where contracts could also build in boundary conditions or conservation laws.
Selection within open-ended archives.Our open-ended search returns an archive rather than a single
model, so the selection rule affects the reported result. The experiments select one frozen program by
validation CRPS. They do not use a test-time Pareto frontier or average archive members. The observed
results support this rule. The kernel selected on validation data ranks first among 58 frozen candidates on
both unseen CFC records. By contrast, the kernel that would have been selected after viewing SF 6 test
performance does not transfer to the two CFC records (Appendix D.3). Validation and test CRPS also have
Spearman ρ= 0.95 across the chemistry campaigns. The archives may contain complementary candidates,
but predictive mixtures are outside the reported evaluation.
Protocol integrity and reward hacking.The current design limits the ways a proposer can exploit its
evaluator. The backend computes every Gram matrix and fit statistic, and search-time scores use meta-
training episodes only. Every reported program is frozen before testing. The same replay safeguard applies
to every selected program, and DWF is the fully audited example that reproduces every validation and test
score exactly (Appendix B.4). Selection on validation episodes also guards against overfitting to the search
objective. A systematic study is a valuable next step. Adversarial proposers could be instructed to target
the evaluator, and rotating probe sets or held-out evaluators could measure how quickly search-time fitness
and held-out performance diverge. A matched campaign with the novelty penalty set to zero would isolate
its effect and complement the archive ablation of Appendix B.5.
H LLM Prompts
This appendix documents the agent interface and reproduces the prompts. The agent receives a system
instruction, a domain task description, the structured tool definitions, and an evolutionary assignment. The
assignment appends the iteration, search mode, target niche, parent, and inspirations to the task description.
Table 4 specifies the required formulation fields.
H.1 Agent Interface
Conversation format and examples.The initial conversation contains one user message, which com-
prises the task and the assignment. There is no fixed few-shot bank of solved kernels and no scripted
assistant demonstrations. The task descriptions contain interface examples and the input conventions
of each domain, which are reproduced below. For later runs, the parent payload contains its candidate
identifier (ID), name, contract, selection score, source, and parameters. Each inspiration contains its ID,
name, niche, score, and mathematical form. These archive-derived examples vary with the campaign
history. Within a run, assistant tool calls and backend responses remain in the conversation. A root run has
no parent payload, and its inspirations are empty only while the archive is empty.
Tool calls.Tools take JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) objects with the names, required fields, and
allowed values declared in their schemas. Formulation fields are strings. Staging supplies the candidate
name, contract, Python source, and formulation ID, with optional initial parameters, a parameter space,
and parents. A tunable parameter declares a float, integer, or categorical type, with its range or choices
and an optional linear or logarithmic scale. Candidate code must implement the exact entry point and
output shape in the system prompt. The trusted tools return verification and evaluation results, so the agent
supplies code and tool arguments rather than a claimed numeric result.
Closure-tree serialization.For the closure contract, closure_tree(parameters) encodes sums,
products, and nonnegative scalar multiplication as nested dictionaries. A base node has op="base", a
library kind, and its numeric parameters. A sum or product has op="sum" or op="product" and a
55

--- Page 56 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
children list of at least two nodes. A scaling node has op="scale", a finite nonnegative weight, and
one child. For example, the following is an illustrative serialization of a library-kernel sum, not a few-shot
example supplied to the proposer:
Closure-tree serialization
{"op": "sum", "children": [
{"op": "base", "kind": "matern52", "lengthscale": 0.5},
{"op": "scale", "weight": 0.2,
"child": {"op": "base", "kind": "linear"}}]}
The documented library leaves include linear, RBF, Matérn-3/2, Matérn-5/2, rational-quadratic, periodic,
and spectral-mixture kernels. Base variance and scaling weights are nonnegative. Lengthscales and the
rational-quadratic shape or periodic period are positive. The discovery task’s restriction on ordinary
closure-library rediscoveries is retained verbatim in the task descriptions below.
H.2 Shared Prompts
The software name in the opening line of the system instruction is normalized to [Kernaut]. The interface
and workflow agree with the controller implementation.
Kernaut agent: system instruction
You are [Kernaut]'s synthesis controller. Design executable Gaussian-process
kernel programs and improve them using evidence from deterministic tools. You reason and
write
candidate source, but you never claim to have executed code, computed a Gram matrix,
fitted a GP,
or established a verification tier yourself.
Every proposal must use exactly one contract and entry point:
- feature_map:`feature_point(x, parameters) -> array[m]`, where`x`is one immutable
point;
the trusted interpreter calls it independently for every input and constructs`Phi @
Phi.T`
- residual_feature_map: the same`feature_point`interface; the interpreter adds a trusted
base
kernel plus`residual_weight**2 * Phi @ Phi.T`
- additive_feature_map:`coordinate_feature(value, parameters) -> array[m]`; the
interpreter
averages its feature Gram matrix over input coordinates
- spectral:`spectral_components(input_dimension, parameters)`returns
`(frequencies[m, input_dimension], raw_weights[m])`
- input_transform:`transform_point(x, parameters) -> array[q]`, where`x`is one immutable
point; the trusted interpreter applies`parameters.base_kernel`by pullback
- residual_input_transform: the same`transform_point`interface; the interpreter adds a
trusted
kernel on the original inputs to a nonnegative weighted pullback kernel
- closure:`closure_tree(parameters) -> trusted closure-tree dictionary`
- unverified:`kernel_matrix(x, parameters) -> array[n, n]`for empirical diagnostics only
Contract names are not function names. In particular, an`input_transform`candidate MUST
define
`transform_point(x, parameters)`(not`input_transform`). It receives exactly one 1-D
point and
must return exactly one nonempty 1-D transformed point. Do not reshape it into a batch.
Certified candidate code must be deterministic and free of module-level state; it may
import only
numpy or math and may not use random-number generators. Submit a candidate, verify it, and
evaluate
it only after Tier 2 acceptance. Once a candidate passes Tier 2, evaluate it before
proposing any
56

--- Page 57 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
revision. Inspect structured failures and revise deliberately. A revision must change
kernel
behavior, not comments, docstrings, formatting, or parameters alone. In
mathematical-novelty mode,
test at least two substantially different formulations rather than spending the campaign
on one
lineage. Independent formulations should be submitted as roots without parents. Supply
parent IDs
only for genuine revisions whose behavior descends from those candidates; changing
contract or
topic does not by itself establish lineage. Use archive queries to avoid duplicates and
compare the
quality/cost frontier. Unverified candidates can be evaluated after Tier 1 but are never
accepted.
In mathematical-novelty mode, prefer the backend workflow: propose a formulation, stage
source and
a bounded parameter space, verify the draft, optimize its parameters, submit the selected
immutable
trial, then evaluate it. A parameter is learnable only when declared in that tuning space.
Analyze
known equivalences, normalized-domain cycles or scales, irrelevant-coordinate and
cross-coordinate
mechanisms, a falsification test, feature growth with dimension, and expected
conditioning. End
with a concise report naming the best candidate IDs and remaining limitations.
The assignment below is a template. Angle brackets mark values that are filled in at run time. A root run
receives the root instruction and an empty parent, and its inspirations are empty only while the archive
is empty. A revision run receives the revision instruction, and its parent and inspiration payloads are
serialized JSON objects with the fields listed above.
Kernaut agent: evolutionary assignment (template)
# Evolutionary search assignment
Iteration:<iteration index>
Search mode:<root | revision>
Target niche:<niche>
<root mode:>Create an independent root and leave parents empty.
<revision mode:>Make a genuine behavioral revision of parent<candidate ID>and cite
exactly that
parent unless you truly recombine another candidate.
Inspirations are context only and are not parents unless their mechanism is actually
incorporated.
Follow the formulation -> stage -> verify -> optimize parameters -> submit staged
candidate ->
evaluate workflow. Complete one candidate, then stop.
Parent:
<null in root mode | parent payload: candidate ID, name, contract, selection score,
source, parameters>
Inspirations:
<[] | up to k_insp payloads: ID, name, niche, score, mathematical form>
H.3 Domain Task Descriptions
Each box shows the task portion of the opening user message. A task description gives the domain, the
input conventions, and the required interface. It does not describe the evaluation data or the scoring.
The backend selection score, including its regret and novelty terms, is specified in Equation(5), and the
interface convention for spectral frequencies is clarified in Appendix A.3.
57

--- Page 58 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
BBO task description
# Procedural meta-BO kernel discovery
Design a single dimension-agnostic Gaussian-process kernel that generalizes across a
distribution
of normalized, low-to-moderate-dimensional Bayesian-optimization tasks. Training episodes
include
smooth anisotropic, periodic, multimodal, and rugged functions under hidden coordinate
permutations, reflections, monotone input warpings, invertible cross-coordinate couplings,
and a
small number of irrelevant coordinates.
Each task standardizes its outputs and fits the same small grid of outer covariance
amplitudes
and diagonal noise values.
Prefer Tier-2 candidates that:
- accept any input dimension rather than hard-coding a two-dimensional feature map;
- express useful inductive biases beyond renaming standard RBF or Matérn kernels;
- remain numerically stable for input dimensions 2, 5, 6, and 8;
- balance smooth global structure with periodic or localized variation; and
- use parent lineage when making a genuine revision, and leave parents empty for an
independent
root formulation.
This is a mathematical-novelty campaign. Closure trees are disallowed for discovered
candidates:
ordinary sums, products, and rescalings of RBF/Matérn kernels belong in the reference
bank, not the
search space. Start each idea by calling`propose_formulation`. State the exact
mathematical form,
why it is PSD, its closest known kernel and concrete difference, and the BO behavior it
should
improve. Only then implement it and submit the returned formulation ID.
Prefer the`input_transform`contract when inventing geometry. Its required entry point is
exactly
`transform_point(x, parameters)`: it receives one immutable 1-D point and must return one
nonempty
1-D transformed point. Do not define a function named`input_transform`, and do not
reshape the
point into a batch. The trusted runtime stacks those vectors and evaluates
`parameters["base_kernel"]`on the transformed inputs. For example, the base specification
is
`{"kind": "matern52", "lengthscale": 0.5}`. The transform must be dimension-agnostic and
independent
of other observations. A spectral candidate defines
`spectral_components(input_dimension, parameters)`so its returned frequencies can always
have
shape`[m, input_dimension]`. Pointwise, residual, additive, and genuinely new spectral
constructions are also
permitted. Independent formulations are root candidates and must not cite unrelated
discoveries as
parents. A genuine revision must cite its actual parent, and a parameter-only edit of a
parent is
rejected.
Candidate-specific parameters are fixed unless they are declared in a staged candidate's
tuning
space and optimized by the backend. Do not call fixed constants learnable. On normalized
`[0, 1]`
inputs express frequencies in cycles, for example`sin(2*pi*f*x)`. Prefer the formulation,
staging,
verification, parameter-optimization, immutable-submission, and full-evaluation tool
sequence.
58

--- Page 59 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
Explore at least two substantially different constructions. Inspect the archive before
proposing a
revision, and do not treat a syntactic rewrite or parameter-only change as a novel kernel.
Forecasting task description
# Time-series forecasting kernel discovery
Design a single dimension-agnostic Gaussian-process kernel that acts as a transferable
prior for
forecasting long monthly time series. Each episode standardizes a training window of one
record
and forecasts a fixed horizon of future months. Inputs are 1-D values in [0, 1] (the month
index
scaled to the record), and observation noise is small. The kernel should also remain
numerically
stable when evaluated at input dimensions 1 through 8.
This is a mathematical-novelty campaign. Discovered closure trees are rejected because
ordinary
sums and products of standard kernels belong in the baseline bank. Start every candidate
with
`propose_formulation`, giving its exact mathematical form, PSD argument, closest known
kernel,
behavioral distinction, and a falsification test. Then stage, verify, tune, and submit it
through the
normal immutable-candidate workflow.
Prefer`input_transform`,`feature_map`,`residual_input_transform`, or genuinely new
`spectral`
constructions. The trusted interpreter constructs the Gram matrix; candidate code should
only
return the certified pointwise transform, features, or spectral components required by its
contract. The kernel must accept any input dimension. Independent ideas have no
parents, while a real revision must cite the candidate it changes.
Develop at least two structurally different proposals before refining the strongest one.
Chemistry task description
# Enzyme-kinetics kernel discovery
Design one certified Gaussian-process kernel that acts as a transferable prior for learning
enzyme-catalyzed reaction rates from scattered experiments. Each dataset records the
initial
reaction rate`r_0`measured under a set of experimental conditions. The underlying rate
law
differs between datasets and is not given.
Every input is a seven-dimensional vector in`[0, 1]`, with coordinates in this order:
1. log substrate concentration`C_A`;
2. inhibitor concentration`C_I`(linear, can be zero);
3. log second-substrate concentration`C_B`;
4. product concentration`C_P`(linear, can be zero);
5. log enzyme loading`Enz`;
6. temperature`T`(linear, 278-368 K); and
7. pH (linear, 4-10).
This is a mathematical-novelty campaign. Discovered closure trees are rejected because
ordinary
59

--- Page 60 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
sums and products of standard kernels belong in the baseline bank. Start every candidate
with
`propose_formulation`, giving its exact mathematical form, PSD argument, closest known
kernel,
behavioral distinction, and a falsification test. Then stage, verify, tune, and submit it
through the
normal immutable-candidate workflow.
Prefer`input_transform`,`feature_map`,`residual_input_transform`, or genuinely new
`spectral`
constructions. The trusted interpreter constructs the Gram matrix; candidate code should
only
return the certified pointwise transform, features, or spectral components required by its
contract. The input dimension is fixed at seven for this benchmark. Independent ideas have
no
parents, while a real revision must cite the candidate it changes.
Develop at least two structurally different proposals before refining the strongest one.
Do not
claim that a covariance is itself a recovered rate law.
Glucose task description
# CGM forecasting kernel discovery
Design one certified Gaussian-process kernel that acts as a transferable prior for
forecasting a
simulated type-1 diabetes patient's continuous glucose monitor (CGM) response to a meal
and an
insulin bolus. Each patient runs six-hour episodes. In each episode the patient eats one
meal and
may receive one insulin bolus, and CGM is read every five minutes. Every episode of a
patient
starts from the same physiological state, so episodes differ only through their
intervention and
sensor noise.
Every GP input is one CGM reading, a five-dimensional vector in`[0, 1]`with coordinates
in
this order:
1. reading time, minutes divided by 360;
2. meal size, grams divided by 60;
3. meal start time, minutes divided by 360;
4. bolus size, insulin units divided by 1.5 (zero means no bolus); and
5. bolus start time, minutes divided by 360 (equal to the meal start when there is no
bolus).
Coordinates 2-5 are constant within an episode, so the kernel decides both how readings
correlate over time and how whole trajectories share strength across interventions.
This is a mathematical-novelty campaign. Discovered closure trees are rejected because
ordinary
sums and products of standard kernels belong in the baseline bank. Start every candidate
with
`propose_formulation`, giving its exact mathematical form, PSD argument, closest known
kernel,
behavioral distinction, and a falsification test. Then stage, verify, tune, and submit it
through the
normal immutable-candidate workflow.
Prefer`input_transform`,`feature_map`,`residual_input_transform`, or genuinely new
`spectral`
constructions. The trusted interpreter constructs the Gram matrix; candidate code should
only
60

--- Page 61 ---
Kernel Autoresearch for Open-Ended Model Discovery
return the certified pointwise transform, features, or spectral components required by its
contract. The input dimension is fixed at five for this benchmark. Independent ideas have
no
parents, while a real revision must cite the candidate it changes.
Develop at least two structurally different proposals before refining the strongest one.
Do not
claim that a covariance is itself a recovered physiological model.
61